---
title: "Data's password"
category: tv
tags: startrek
redirect_from:
- /tv/startrek/datas-password.html
- /2015-05-22-how-strong-is-datas-password.html
description: "How strong is the password Lt. Commander Data sets in the Star Trek: TNG episode 'Brothers'?"
---

There's an episode of Star Trek: The Next Generation where Data impersonates
Captain Picard's voice to gain command control, then locks command functions
behind a [very long numeric code](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rAUVUUhf7U0).
In practice, how strong is this as a password, and could Picard break it with a
brute force attack?

The code Data gives is 52 characters long, and consists mainly of digits but
with three letters given in the phonetic alphabet:

> 173467321476c32789777643t732v73117888732476789764376

The code as appears on the screen is slightly different, consisting of 51
characters, missing the 7th character '3', 23rd character '4', and adding
another '1' before the 35th character that begins '888':

> 17346721476c3278977763t732v731171888732476789764376

It's a fair guess that in reality, this password was generated by going around
clockwise on a computer keyboard's numpad. This would explain why there are no
fives or zeroes. This creates a repeating pattern that makes it more predictable
and less random, and is a great example of how human-generated passwords are
weaker than true random.

If it were truly random, a 52 digital numbers-only passcode would have around
2<sup>172.74</sup> possibilities, or the slightly lower 2<sup>169.42</sup> for a
51-digit code. By today's standards this is excellent: 128-bit or higher
passwords are impractical to break, requiring a billion trillion trillion
guesses per second to guarantee a break within a week (current best technology
in 2015 is around a trillion per second).

Considering the lack of fives and zeroes, the 52-character password really only
has 2<sup>156</sup> possibilities, but Data has made the clever addition of
adding three letters into the password. Thus any attempt to brute force pure
digits would fail. If an attacker does not know about the missing fives and
zeroes and assumes letters are considered equally likely as digits, the number
of possibilities they must test is about 2<sup>267.84</sup> - described by
cryptographer Bruce Schneier as "infeasible until computers are built from
something other than matter and occupy something other than space".[^2]

The Enterprise's main computer is probably comparable in power to that of the
USS Voyager, which is cited as capable of 575 trillion calculations per
nanosecond.[^1] Even assuming one calculation equals one cracked password, such
a computer could at best crack 2<sup>103.84</sup> passwords per year, taking a
trillion such starships to break 2<sup>143.70</sup>.

__Conclusion: Data's 52-digit code is secure.__

If you picked a 52 digit password today, it will be very strong. However, the
exact password 173467321476c32789777643t732v73117888732476789764376 is extremely
weak, since it has appeared in a popular science fiction television series.

## Footnotes

[^1]: <http://memory-alpha.wikia.com/wiki/Computer>

[^2]: <https://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2009/09/the_doghouse_cr.html>
