---
title: "Draft IP Bill's fake judicial oversight"
category: opinion
tags: privacy
redirect_from:
- 20151104-draft-ip-bill-fake-judicial-oversight.html
description: 
license: CC BY
---

I don't have the legal expertise to analyze the recent release of the UK's draft
Investigatory Powers Bill, but there are already some useful comments about the
proposed law.

Conservative MP David Davis was highly critical of his own party's new law and
made two excellent points on Twitter. First, all oversight will be made by
officers [appointed by Prime
Minister](https://twitter.com/DavidDavisMP/status/661901229912641536), not an
independent body as recommended by the Anderson report. Second, the judicial
oversight [will only check that procedure was
followed](https://twitter.com/DavidDavisMP/status/661961900322869248), not that
the law was followed.

The oversight standard of the bill is a complete sham. It gives the illusion of
judicial oversight, but keeps all the power within the Cabinet Office [where
GCHQ wants it](https://twitter.com/rj_gallagher/status/661965336514863104).

## More doublespeak

Another piece of
[doublespeak](https://orbitalflower.github.io/20150604-intelligence-gap-is-doublespeak.html)
from Theresa May is the phrase "world-leading oversight regime".

Divide its literal meaning from its implied value. Literally, it means the UK
will do something no other country has done. But the unproven implications are
that it's the best solution in the world, that the only reason nobody else has
done this before is that the UK is ahead of the times, and other countries will
soon follow suit.

The reality is that other attempts to pass this kind of law around the world
have failed, including the UK's earlier multiple attempts to pass the Snooper's
Charter. Collecting citizens' internet history is illegal in the US, Canada,
Australia and most of Europe, [according to the
Guardian](http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/03/may-calls-for-internet-companies-to-store-details-of-website-visits).

May is further quoted as saying "It's not mass surveillance", which is
misleading because other, top secret systems already conduct mass surveillance.

## Backdoored oversight

The IP Bill replaces all existing oversight units (the IoCC, the CSC, and ISCom,
according to the bill) with a new IPC, who David Davis MP points out will be
appointed directly by the Prime Minister. The IPC will be supported by Judicial
Commissioners, who are also appointed directly by Prime Minister.

The Home Secretary, also appointed directly by the Prime Minister, will continue
to sign off on warrants. The Judicial Commissioners will also sign off on the
warrants, but Davis warns that they will have no power to actually weigh
evidence, and Snowden called it [notational, not
serious](https://twitter.com/Snowden/status/661965042351521792).

Leaked GCHQ documents revealed that they are desperately frightened of actual
judges gaining the power to grant their warrants. A judge is an expert in what
is legal and proportionate, whereas the Home Secretary is just a politician who
accepts GCHQ claims at face value.

Targets will be allowed the right of appeal, but the IP Bill doesn't allow them
to be informed that they have been targeted unless they have been the subject of
serious errors.

## Metadata vs content

ISPs will be forced to divulge only metadata, not content. But [what GCHQ
decides to be
metadata](https://theintercept.com/document/2015/09/25/content-metadata-matrix)
is secret and not always obvious.

Your instant messenger buddy list is metadata. The folders you sort your e-mail
into. User IDs scraped from cookies. Passwords and usernames. E-mail addresses
and phone numbers.

The draft bill promises to change this definition, though how it will decide
exactly what is and isn't metadata in practice has yet to be seen. Likewise, the
summary is perhaps deliberately vague in its explanation of who will be able to
access this metadata and under what circumstances.

## Britain has been hacking for years

The draft bill admits that yes, UK law enforcement and intelligence already
engages in hacking, or "equipment interference". The National Crime Agency
already hacks targets, which should have been obvious given its success against
hackers and high secrecy.

Hacking has been secretly interpreted as legal under the Intelligence Services
Act 1994 and Police Act 1997. The new law will explicitly allow intelligence and
military to hack devices without a warrant in some circumstances, but fewer than
current, and will limit law enforcement to only use it for serious crime,
however exactly that is defined.

UK ISPs will be forced to help agencies deploy hacking, which quite probably
they are already doing, given reports of "black box" devices installed at
British ISPs. Smaller orgs will have an assigned "single point of contact" who
deals with all requests, which will help keep it secret. Larger companies like
BT presumably do so much of this hacking stuff that they need more than one guy.

Hacking warrants will allow the Secretary of State to judge whether they are
necessary and proportionate, in intelligence cases, or the Chief Constable, in
serious criminal cases. The Judicial Commissioner does no actual judging, giving
politicians and police significantly increased power over the people.

## Britain finally admits mass surveillance

The draft bill admits that the UK uses mass surveillance to map people's social
networks and discover new targets, for intelligence cases, terrorism and serious
crime.

Under RIPA, it records communications en masse in order to search it for
terrorist and criminal activity.

Under section 94 of the aptly-named Telecommunications Act 1984, it analyzes
domestic and foreign metadata to map relationships between suspects.

The Intelligence Services Act 1994 allows the UK to engage in "bulk equipment
interference", or mass hacking. It increasingly uses this to access data it lost
access to post-Snowden, after Google and Yahoo discovered the NSA/GCHQ stealing
user data from their systems and sites like Facebook enabled HTTPS to protect
user privacy.

## Safeguards we don't have

It's the safeguards that are most frightening, because they suggest that those
safeguards don't already exist. They also suggest an upper limit to what the
safeguards will be.

Mass surveillance warrants will only be granted to security and intelligence
agencies, and only for the purpose of national security. This leaves open the
possibility that Tempora, XKeyscore or bulk hacking were being used for domestic
crime, and commercial espionage under the guise of economic wellbeing.

Mass surveillance and mass hacking, but not metadata collection or targeted
hacking, will be limited to acquiring information on people outside the UK.
However, data can be taken from people inside the UK as long as the warrant
targets someone abroad; e.g. forcing EE to automatically rootkit any UK phone
that communicates with a known member of Al Qaeda. It's limited to cases where
this is "necessary", but only the Home Secretary decides what's necessary.

Protections applying to data will apply to metadata. Previously, if data was
acquired for a certain purpose (perhaps only terrorism), its data could not be
used for other purposes (perhaps commercial espionage), but its metadata could.

Use of bulk data belonging to UK persons will now require a targeted warrant to
use that information. This suggests that the data of foreign targets is freely
collected and accessed without individual warrants, and will continue to be,
while data has been collected on UK targets without individual warrant.

In all cases, the warrant here is a "Home Secretary special" and not an ordinary
court warrant. This is likely to see terror suspects denied rights in the
interest of national security, something Theresa May has a record of being okay
with.

## Reading your internet history

ISPs will be forced to keep logs of all users for 12 months, listing what hosts
that user has connected to. The UK reveals in its report that it can currently
do this, but only starts collecting when provided a warrant for that user. The
new bill requires them to hold this data for all users, even if not suspected of
a crime.

ISPs are already required to take orders from the Secretary of State on matters
of national security, under the Telecommunications Act 1984 (again, aptly
named). Under RIPA, they're required to remove encryption that they apply,
something which one would imagine mainly applies to mobile providers.

The government will be required to pay ISPs for their expense, which is probably
already something that happens.

## Stripping encryption

The other big issue was that this bill was expected to outlaw apps which used
[end-to-end
encryption](https://twitter.com/josephfcox/status/661893308013289472/photo/1).
According to this draft bill document, it won't, for two reasons.

First, it promises not to change existing law:

> The draft Bill will not impose any additional requirements in relation to
> encryption over and above the existing obligations in RIPA.

According to the document, RIPA legislation already requires Communications
Service Providers (CSPs) to provide the ability to maintain the ability to
decrypt any encryption that they apply. The term CSP generally applies to ISPs
and phone companies.

The second reason is that UK law doesn't apply to non-UK companies, so any
requests would be purely voluntary.

But there are a loopholes that would allow the encryption ban to sneak back in.

* The term "Communications Service Provider" is vaguely defined in RIPA, and
could be interpreted more broadly, or "clarified", to include any website or
online service.
* The law may apply to any company that operates partially within the UK, such
as a company with a UK branch or UK servers. That could force foreign companies
to adhere to the law.
* They can always change the law before it passes, or after it passes, or
re-interpret the law. Ditching the encryption ban idea might be a way to get the
fake judicial oversight scam through first.

The result is that PGP, OTR, iMessage, Facetime and Signal are still probably
going to be safe. If the government really wants your data, they'll just hack
your device.

## Feedback

A Joint Committee of Parliament is expected to form and request feedback from
the public. I recommend that if you contact this committee when it puts out its
request for feedback.

The Home Office also accepts e-mail feedback on the bill at
<investigatorypowers@homeoffice.gsi.gov.uk>.
