---
title: "Why can't white people be terrorists?"
category: opinion
tags: 
redirect_from:
- 20150618-why-cant-white-people-be-terrorists.html
description: 
license: CC BY
updated: 2025-08-01
---

Current events: In the United States, mass murders by white people are rarely
classified by the news as terrorism, even when the attack is politically
motivated or the attacker uses what the press calls "terrorist-like tactics".
There are some interesting ideas as to why this is the case.
{:.lead}

__#1:__ Terrorism is essentially a tactic used by the weak against the powerful.
It's typically used by minority factions who lack the manpower, training or
equipment of a nation state, and as a result can only attack weakly-defended
targets with whatever weapons are available to civilians.

When a white American launches a terror attack, one reason it's not called
terrorism is that whites are not a political minority. White Christians are very
much the ruling class in the United States, so when one of that group exerts
power even in an extremist manner, it's still only asserting the status quo.
It's not an act of rebellion, at least not in the big picture.

__#2:__ Terrorism, generally, requires either the ability to avoid being caught,
or a complete disregard for the consequences of one's actions. Getting away with
terrorism in the US today would require an uncommon level of skill and/or the
protection of a powerful group like a foreign country. It's much more common
that the attacker is either a reckless psychopath or some kind of fanatic, and
thus isn't discouraged by being caught or killed.

White Americans don't normally have cultural links to foreign states that would
fund, train, protect or exfiltrate them, and even then it's extremely difficult
for anyone to operate a domestic terror group inside the US. There are
essentially no white radical groups motivated enough to operate or support a
campaign of violence against their own country. This limits most white American
terrorists to solo, one-off attacks that end in the attacker being killed or
captured.

It's hard for the public to consider "lone wolf" attackers as terrorists
because terrorism is generally thought of as a series of well-planned attacks
performed by a known group who pose a persistent threat. Once a lone wolf
attacker is caught, his micro-rebellion is considered defeated and his motives
are usually explained as derived from mental issues or personal delusions of
grandeur rather than a genuine threat to the state.

__#3:__ Terrorists frequently use bombs, either as a suicide attack or a planted
bomb in order to kill as many people as possible instantaneously or destroy some
piece of infrastructure, while the bomber expects to avoid capture simply by not
being there once the attack happens.

"Lone wolf" attackers tend to use semi-automatic guns instead, readily available
in the United States where there's a strong culture associating firearm
ownership with personal liberty and self-reliance. Bombs are thought of as the
weapon of cowards and terrorists, whereas gun owners are considered brave and
heroic. It's difficult for the American public to break that mental association.

__#4:__ There are other well-known templates for mass killings that fit patterns
other than terrorism. An attack which could both be described as "terrorism" and
as a "mass shooting" may be considered primarily as a mass shooting, simply
because this fits the pattern well. Likewise, a white person killing black
people is widely understood in the US as a "hate crime", so it's easy for the
public to think of an attack as a massive hate crime rather than terrorism.

__#5:__ Of course, 9/11 also had a considerable influence on the modern American
idea of terrorism. Muslim attackers, Middle-Eastern attackers and suicide
attackers are more likely to be considered terrorist by mental association with
9/11, whereas Christians, US citizens, white people and gun attackers are
not associated with 9/11 and do not fit the terrorist archetype so strongly.

Even if an attack fits the technical definition of a terrorm, the public may not
consider it such if it doesn't match their mental image. The attackers' race and
religion are factors in that, but they're only part of the picture.

**Update** (August 2025): With the UK government's recent designation of
activist group Palestine Action as a terrorist group, and willingness to assert
that any given pro-Palestine protester is a member of that group even if they
have never formally joined or expressed support for the group, it is now
trivially easy for white people to be designated a terrorist. Progress!
