---
title: "Is Samus Aran transgender now?"
category: opinion
tags: 
redirect_from:
- 20150903-is-samus-aran-transgender-now.html
description: 
license: CC BY
published: false
---

Today's controversy is a Wikipedia edit war over whether or not the protagonist
of the Metroid game series, Samus Aran, is a transgender woman.

## The source

The origin of this argument is an article posted on The Mary Sue on September
1st 2015 at 2:48pm server time (6:48pm UTC), titled
[Metroid's Samus Aran is a Transgender Woman. Deal With
It.](http://www.themarysue.com/metroids-samus-aran-transgender-woman/) The
authors, women's rights activist Brianna Wu and transgender writer Ellen
McGrody, base their claim on a quote from developer Hirofumi Matsuoka, who in
1994 said Samus was secretly a "newhalf", a Japanese word for a male-to-female
transgender or crossdresser.

Unfortunately, the quote in context is plausibly a joke, rather than a statement
of fact, and the rest of the article has only weak supporting arguments.

## A secret of Samus that only you know

The origin of the only quote possibly identifying Samus as transgender is from
the Super Metroid Strategy Guide in Japanese, released 1994. In an interview
with the development team, [translated into
English](http://www.metroid-database.com/sm/interview.php) in 2009, a sidebar
asked each of the development staff for various pieces of information, including
"A secret of Samus that only you know".

Most had difficulty answering this question, since it's difficult to know
anything truly secret about a fictional character. But graphic designer Hirofumi
Matsuoka gave an amusing response: "Samus isn't a woman, in fact she's a
_newhalf_." The original quote in Japanese on [page
91](http://metroid-database.com/sm/interview/page91.jpg) of the book.

## Samus' gender

Matsuoka statement seems quite likely to be a joke. The original Metroid
revealed Samus to be a woman only at the end of the game, in a twist since many
players presumed an intergalactic bounty hunter to be male. When Matsuoka is
asked for a secret, "she's actually a man after all" is an amusing response.
Even outside of the context of Metroid, genderbending is a frequent source of
humour, especially in the less politically correct 1990s Japan.

None of the other developers concurred with Matsuoka, and his response was to a
question of "something that only you know", suggesting that even if he was
serious, he's stating something that's his personal opinion alone and not
mutually agreed with the team (like the original team vote that Samus should be
female).

But even if this was considered canon, Matsuoka says Samus is "not a woman", but
a "newhalf". This is at odds with the modern interpretation that a transgender
woman is still a woman. The term "newhalf" in Japanese is also ambiguous, and
could quite equally refer to a crossdresser or drag queen. Given that Matsuoka
says Samus is "not a woman", it seems that he's either making the second, or has
insufficient knowledge of transgenderism to identify Samus as such.

Matsuoka's statment was directly contradicted by Yoshio Sakamoto, director of
Super Metroid (his Samus secret: he knows where Samus' beauty spot is), who on
the Metroid Zero Mission [site
FAQ](http://metroid.jp/metroid_version2/development/faq3.html) states that
Metroid Prime coming to Playstation 2 is as unlikely as the statement that Samus
is actually a newhalf.

So even if you assume Matsuoka is serious, his boss says it's not true.

## Unreasonable arguments

The rest of the article contains no other canonical sources on Samus'
transgender status. The article is full of illogical and emotional reasoning
that doesn't hold water.

Beginning with the article title, "deal with it" is a statement that the
preceding statement, "Metroid's Samus Aran is a Transgender Woman" is an
incontrovertable fact that is merely contested because its opponents are
uncomfortable accepting change or ideas they don't like. This line of reasoning
is used in several places in the article.

The article admits that "there has been some debate asking if the comment was in
jest or genuine", but stops short of allowing that debate to cast doubt on the
premise.

It does consider whether Matsuoka's remark could be a joke on Samus'
"traditionally masculine" appearance, but the character is almost always
depicted as feminine even in canon works: Metroid 1 showed her with long hair
and a bikini in the end credits, and Super Metroid showed her in similar attire
and a clearly feminine appearance. The only example of a "masculine" Samus cited
by the article is a Nintendo Power issue that gives her height as 6'3", but it
seems unlikely that Matsuoka would have read this or that this figure is canon.
Sakamoto said that the developers intentionally tried to express Samus'
femininity.

The article does admit Sakamoto's denial of Matsuoka's statement, and concedes
that later games in the series as well as an official manga depict Samus as
appearing to be female since childhood. But it disputes both statements by
placing them in the wider context of "cisnormativity and transgender erasure",
suggesting for example that anyone bringing up Sakamoto's denial is doing it
intentionally because they (and Sakamoto) are part of a culture that isn't
comfortable with a transgender character.

But while these larger issues are important, they don't determine whether or not
the facts are true. Sakamoto's statment is official and at least equally canon
as anything Matsuoka says. And where the article interprets Sakamoto's quote as
saying "Samus being a newhalf is not impossible, but unlikely", this holds a
much more optimistic tone than the original quote, which, while not an outright
denial, relegates both the mythical Playstation 2 port and Samus' secret newhalf
status to the category of urban legends.

It suggests that Nintendo has "slowly altered Samus' design into a petite woman
with large breasts", and that this makes fans uncomfortable accepting an
increasingly conventionally attractive character as transgender. It's certainly
the case that Samus' Zero Suit outfit from _Metroid: Other M_ and _Smash Bros_
has been popular with many male fans and drawn criticism from some feminists who
find a skin-tight combat outfit with high heels implausible.

However, this has more to do with improved graphics capability of modern
consoles than an actual change in character design. A more pixelated Samus
already wore a similar costume in _Super Metroid_ (1994), and contrary to claims
that Samus has been made "petite", in Smash Bros she appears approximately the
same height as Solid Snake, a male soldier.

The arguments get weaker from there. The article suggests that it's unreasonable
to expect proof of Samus' gender status when science fiction elements are even
less realistic. The presence of aliens and spaceships doesn't make Samus
transgender.

It cites the authority of creator intent as proof of Matsuoka's statement, but
doesn't give the same credit to Sakamoto's statement. Then it asks the reader to
simply give benefit of the doubt to the premise, which, again, isn't proof, it's
just asking the reader to accept a premise without proof. This is too weak for
an article that started by declaring "deal with it".

## The edit war

On September 1 at 16:25 UTC, apparently two hours before the Mary Sue article, a
user with no other edits changed the Samus Aran entry on Wikipedia to replace
all female pronouns with male ones with the edit note claiming Samus was in fact
a "trans boy". It was quickly reverted.

On September 2 at 00:56 UTC, an anonymous user from an IPv6 address allocated to
AT&T cited the Mary Sue article to edit the Wikipedia entry that Samus is
transgender. It was reverted. The IPv6 user quickly restored their edit,
claiming in an edit note that the revert was vandalism. It was reverted a second
time with a note claiming Matsuoka later admitted the newhalf line was a joke,
but the user again restored the edit claiming such edits without proof were
"transphobic vandalism".

The edits were repeatedly removed by various users, and the IPv6 user restored
them with the edit note "go be a transmisogynist somewhere else". The edits were
again reverted, and the IPv6 user restored them with the note "Stop this stupid
edit war or I WILL report you to wikipedia sysops".

Just as the edits were again reverted, the IPv6 user edited the article's talk
page claming that their edits were "proper info" on Samus' transgender status,
claimed the reversions were "apparently", "probably" by "reactionaries" who were
reverting the edits as vandalism and causing an edit war, and requested that
admins lock the article to prevent further such "vandalism". The user re-made
the edits.

The edit war continued with the user blaming Gamergate for making the edits and
called the reverting editors "MRAs". After other IP addresses started adding the
edits back in, an admin locked the page.

Quickly after this, the anonymous IPv6 user posted to the talk page claiming all
reverting editors were "reactionary MRA gamergators". They asserted that
Wikipedia considers The Mary Sue a sourceable website, suggesting that the user
is more familiar with Wikipedia protocol than their blank edit history might
suggest, although it was actually rated "situational" at best. The user also
demanded that Brianna Wu was sufficiently credible on the matter for the
information's inclusion in Wikipedia, but this did not convince the admins.

The user insisted that they would only back down if the creator of Metroid
himself stepped up to declare that Samus is not transgender, ignoring that the
series director Sakamoto specifically said exactly that. The user was then
banned from editing Wikipedia after calling another user a "transmisogynist
fuck".

## The aftermath

The Wikipedia edit war spilled out over the internet at large. On September 2 at
01:19 UTC a Reddit user posted to Gamergate hub /r/KotakuInAction claiming that
Brianna Wu "and the SJWs" were personally behind the Wikipedia edits. By
timestamp, this was three minutes before the user first posted to the talk page.
The timeline makes it plausible that Gamergaters were involved in reverting the
edits, but regular editors would easily have reverted the edits regardless since
the source was insufficiently reliable.

Another anonymous Wikipedia claimed that the IP could be traced to Brianna Wu's
IP in "Bel Air", but a Redditor suggests that the IP corresponds to North
Carolina (Brianna Wu lives in Boston) and points out that Bel Air is a common
internet joke. The original thread title attributing the edits to "Brianna Wu
and the SJWs" suggests the user isn't certain enough to attribute the edits
directly to Wu, although she did co-write the original Mary Sue article used as
a source.

On September 2 at 04:30 UTC, Brianna Wu tweeted that she had just noticed the
Wikipedia edit war that happened around two hours previous. She denied being
behind it, having played Final Fantasy 14 all night. Since The Mary Sue is a
popular website among transgender people and activists, any reader could have
plausibly made the edits. The article is now locked to prevent further edits.

Given that the director says it's not true, and the only source confirming the
theory is almost certainly a joke, the most likely conclusion is that Samus is
not, canonically, a transgender character.

## However

However.

Shortly following the article, co-author Ellen retweeted some interesting ideas
about how exactly the identity of a game's protagonist is defined by the player.

> I for one love both trans Samus & cis Samus and love seeing fans take
> ownership of beloved characters with self-expressive transformations~
>
> --- @[StarKat99](https://twitter.com/StarKat99/status/638835663157067776), Twitter

> watch this, I'm gonna do a trick
>
> "I choose to read Samus as a trans woman"
>
> there look I did it, this is how art works, neat trick huh
>
> --- @[OhPoorPup](https://twitter.com/OhPoorPup/status/638816267382620161), Twitter

Videogame protagonists are often left vague and malleable so that we can project
our own identities or ideas onto them. The reveal that Samus was a woman at the
end of Metroid 1 was a surprise twist to a lot of people because up until then
they had been playing their own headcanon interpretation of a Samus they
imagined to be male.

Ask yourself what we know about a character like Half-Life's Gordon Freeman. Is
Gordon Freeman straight or gay? It's not defined anywhere in the story, and
until something in a later game clearly defines that, the player has every right
to imagine that facet of character's identity for himself. Gordon Freeman exists
in a kind of superposition of all possible states until canon makes one of them
real.

A quiet character like Samus Aran is not much different from Gordon Freeman. We
know with some certainty that Samus is a woman. But aside from a
behind-the-scenes quip by the director, there's nothing really concrete in the
core material that says she has to be a _cisgender_ woman. That's just our
assumption, as overwhelmingly cisgender players in an overwhelmingly cisgender
society.

We were wrong about Samus' gender once. Why can't we be wrong again?

For most of the Metroid series, Samus is already an adult woman. In Zero Mission
a brief flashback shows Samus as a child, but with short hair and neutral
clothing, her gender is indeterminate. In Other M, a flashback shows Samus
already an adolescent. And in the manga by Ishikawa Kenji, if even we are
required to take it as primary canon, it is established that the young Samus
we see in the Zero Mission flashback underwent extensive gene therapy, after
which the story timeskips immediately to the teenage Samus. There's considerable
leeway.

Certainly, there's insufficient proof for this theory that Samus is a
canonically transgender character. That's where the Mary Sue article fails: it's
making a statement with direct certainty, when at best it's just the author's
headcanon. But there's a kernel of truth hidden in it: art is essentially
subjective, and we are all entitled to our own headcanon.

> The idea that one “canonical” version of a character or story is the only
> version that will ever exist is… ridiculous.
>
> Characters can change over time, stories can change over time. That’s the
> magic of storytelling.
>
> Fictional characters are malleable. Canon doesn’t mean anything. Samus Aran
> will outlast all of us and her mythos will change over time.
>
> --- @[kadybat](https://twitter.com/kadybat), Twitter
