---
title: "Tiefling"
categories: rpg races
description: "History of the tieflings as they changed throughout D&D's publication."
---

Fourth edition was weird for tieflings.

1. Table of Contents
{:toc}

## Origins

### Planescape Campaign Setting (1994)

The tiefling, as far as I can tell, first appeared in AD&D 2nd edition with the
_Planescape Campaign Setting_ (1994)[^1], by Zeb Cook.

Originally, tieflings were described as humans with some fraction of unknown
planar ancestry. They appear to be human but with a few very subtle
differences[^4], to the extent that they could be mistaken for human by someone
unfamiliar with tieflings.

You find this also appears with the githzerai, who are described in this book as
looking "almost exactly like humans", except "slightly thinner and taller".
Later versions would try to make them look more different.

Tieflings are generally distrusted and feared, sometimes unreasonably, with the
result that they become outcast, distrusting and generally angsty.

The tiefling's non-human ancestor is never explicitly stated, only referred to
as "something else" and "mysterious heritage". It's implied to be something from
the lower planes, as they're described as "plane-touched" and their alignment
cannot be lawful good. Second edition tried to avoid using words like "demon" or
"devil".

The etymology of tiefling is likely to be from the German "tief", meaning "deep"
or "low", and "-ling", a suffix suggesting a diminutive offshoot, as in
"seedling", "halfling" or "youngling".

Tieflings originally had a bonus to Intelligence and Charisma, but a penalty to
Strength and Wisdom.

### Monstrous Compendium Appendix (1994)

The Planescape _Monstrous Compendium Appendix_ (1994)[^2] expands on the race
with a monster entry.

Tieflings are described as highly variable, appearing to be human except for
some difference that always gives them away, such as small horns or scales. They
are quick-tempered, quick-witted, stubborn and have massive self-confidence.
Half of all tieflings are ambidextrous.

They're described as preferring dark colours, wearing tight-fitting leggings, a
tunic, a long jacket or cape, and armour made from the hide of vermin from the
lower planes. They're carnivorous, and prefer raw meat and bone, and can survive
on coal and ash for short periods. They're almost always loners, but
occasionally form cults of personality around a powerful tiefling.

The weirdest thing about this is that tieflings nearly all wear tight-fitting
leggings. You have this race where no two are like, distributed across the
planes with no culture of their own, and for no reason they all wear the same
style of trousers.

### The Planewalker's Handbook (1996)

_The Planewalker's Handbook_ (1996)[^3] by Monte Cook makes it clear that most
tieflings have no idea who or what their non-human ancestor was.[^5] It's
generally assumed to be some creature from the lower planes.

As no two tieflings are alike, this book gives a table of random attributes for
character creation. The player rolls five times on the special abilities table
(spell-like abilities, resistances and saving throw bonuses) and 1d4 times on an
appearance table that can give things like horns, goatlike legs, unusual hair or
eye colour, or side effects like casting no shadow.

This book describes another aspect of tiefling psychology: tieflings decide
their own fate. Since the have no culture to tell them who they are, they decide
instead to define themselves by their actions.

This book also features other types of planetouched: the aasimar (good-aligned
equivalents to the tiefling, named for the aasimon, a type of angel that
includes planetars and solars) and genasi (elemental planetouched).

## Development

### Third edition

Prior to D&D third edition, tieflings were limited to the Planescape setting.
I would not be surprised if it was Monte Cook's influence that saw its inclusion
in the D&D 3.0 _Monster Manual_.

It may surprise players who started with D&D 4th or 5th edition that tiefling
was never a core D&D race in 3rd edition. While it appeared in the Monster
Manual, D&D 3e originally had no rules for using monsters as player characters.

### Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting (2001)

That changed when the _Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting_ (2001) introduced the
Level Adjustment system,[^6],[^7] almost certainly because people wanted to play
chaotic good drow after Drizzt Do'Urden and they needed a way to balance
that race's magical abilities against standard player character races.[^8]

A side-effect was that they could use this system to balance aasimar and
tiefling, who were slightly too powerful in the D&D 3.0 Monster Manual to be
standard races.

(As an aside, I read once that SKR admitted aasimar/tiefling weren't worth a
full +1 level adjustment, but were given one anyway to avoid massive numbers of
players choosing these supposedly rare[^9] races them over the slightly weaker
standard races. They couldn't simply buff or nerf these races because they
already appeared in the Monster Manual. Unfortunately, aasimar/tiefling set a
benchmark for LA +1, leading to a number of underpowered races.) 

Planetouched in the Forgotten Realms are explained as people with an ancestor
who consorted with extraplanar visitors to Toril who came through a portal once.
Tieflings are specifically explained as those descended from demons or devils.
In some cases they are descended from the servant of an evil deity, in which
case they bear a birthmark such as that deity's holy symbol or some other trait.

### Monsters of Faer&ucirc;n (2001)

_Monsters of Faer&ucirc;n_ (2001) introduced the fey'ri (elf/demon tieflings)
and tanarukk (orc/demon tieflings). This seems to be a natural extension of
human-based tieflings.

The fey'ri all have visible fiendish features: batlike wings, red eyes, tails
and fine scales. This is in contrast to standard tieflings who can often pass
for human. The fey'ri are descendants of elves who bred with demons to
strengthen their bloodlines.

The tanarukk are the result of a breeding program set up by demons who wished to
produce strong foot soldiers. They have the strength of orcs and the
intelligence of tieflings.

### Races of Faer&ucirc;n (2003)

The tieflings of the Forgotten Realms are often killed at birth, and those that
survive are usually evil. They have similar life expectancy to humans.

In an uncommon feature, this book explicitly names the tieflings' fiendish
ancestors. Most common are the marilith, succubus, erinyes, gelugon, pit
fiend, night hag, rakshasa, and the occasional deity or divine servant.
Tieflings appear human with one or two distinguishing features that vary based
on their ancestor, such as hooves for a devil or cat eyes for a rakshasa.

The fey'ri are the result of sun elves bred with succubi, while the tanarukk are
orcs bred with vrocks. They are technically not considered true tieflings.

Tieflings of Faer&ucirc;n can acquire wings (via a feat) and obtain other
planetouched-exclusive abilities.

### Fiend Folio (2003)

The _Fiend Folio_ added the maeluth (dwarf/devil tieflings) and wispling
(halfling/demon tiefling).

Maeluth are hairless, and more charismatic than normal dwarves. Wisplings have
bright red hair and can magically change their appearance.

This book also added other planetouched: the mechanatrix (Mechanus) and shyft
(ethereal plane). I'm not sure exactly how someone can have a mechanical
creature as an ancestor.

### Monster Manual, v3.5 (2003)

The D&D 3.5 revision didn't still add tiefling to the core races, but it did
add level adjustment and playable stats to many creatures, including the
planetouched.

The Monster Manual describes that tieflings are usually evil, hence their poor
reputation. Many are indistinguishable from humans aside from a disturbing
demeanour, while only some have the tell-tale signs like horns or red eyes. They
generally hide within human societies and pass as human.

A minor change from the Forgotten Realms version is that they automatically gain
Infernal, the language of devils. Logically, a tiefling descended from a demon
should probably speak Abyssal instead. The idea of tieflings being born already
knowing a language like this appeared as a random optional trait in _The
Planewalker's Handbook_ (1996).

The art portrays the tiefling two-weapon fighting, perhaps a reference to the
AD&D 2e tiefling who is canonically ambidextrous.

### Savage Progressions (2004)

Sean K Reynolds wrote a series of articles for the
[Wizards of the Coast website](/rpg/resources/wizards-3e-archive.html),
including two featuring the tiefling. Neither adds significant lore, but they do
provide mechanically useful tools for playing a tiefling in D&D 3.5.

_Level-Adjusted Races_ [^10] allows you to play a weaker version of the tiefling
without level adjustment. It loses the Int +2, its elemental resistances reduce
from 5 to 2, and and its _darkness_ spell-like ability has only a 5 foot radius.
At any time, the character can spend a level to regain those benefits.

_Transition Classes_ [^11] provides a transition class which lets a tiefling
become a half-fiend one level at a time, over the course of three levels (rather
than four, since the tiefling already has +1). Since you don't have to take all
levels of the progression, you can always just take the first level and become
an exceptionally strong tiefling. The existence of this class implies that
there's some ritual by which tieflings can strengthen their fiendish blood.

(Unrelated to the tiefling, but particularly cool nonetheless, is the Savage
Progressions article on the lich template. This makes it plausible for a player
character to become a lich without gaining LA +4 all at once. It's probably best
to do this either upon gaining 9th level spells at level 17, or after reaching
level 20 and effectively progressing to epic level.)

### Unearthed Arcana (2004)

This book featured the tiefling paragon class, a three-level class which allows
you to take levels in "tiefling". The benefits aren't as major as the half-fiend
transition class, but you do get normal hit dice with the paragon class,
including d8 hit dice and all the good saves.

### Planar Handbook (2004)

D&D 3.5 made a greater push for books to offer content for players rather than
DMs, presumably to sell more books. The _Planar Handbook_ presents several
playable races, plus some additional lore on tieflings.

Tieflings are longer-lived than humans, with lifespans up to 150 years. The
random starting age tables are slightly higher so that many tieflings wait
another two years before becoming adventurers.

They respect other mix-breed races, but have an instinctive dislike of
good-aligned races like aasimar. Tieflings of good alignment are rare.

Tieflings often teach themselves Infernal or Abyssal, but since most don't know
whether their ancestor is a demon or devil, they often learn the wrong language.
This is in contrast to the idea that tieflings are supernaturally born knowing
that language.

They are usually raised with a human name but give themselves an Infernal or
Abyssal name, sometimes without knowing knowing its meaning.

### Races of Destiny (2004)

I wasn't greatly impressed with this book. For example, it tells us the
unsurprising and obvious fact that tieflings tend to worship evil deities. In
some cases it even contradicts the _Planar Handbook_ published earlier the same
year.

According to this book, tieflings are specifically the descendents of infernal
creatures, meaning devils, rather than abyssal creatures or any other mysterious
evil outsider. Tieflings are almost all evil, and hated by nearly every other
race, with the result that they view non-tieflings as merely pawns in their
schemes.

Most tieflings now have the small horns, red eyes or the like, and those who can
pass completely for human are rare. Only a rare few have cloven hooves, a tail,
or the like.

Tieflings supernaturally acquire the Infernal language, unlike _Planar Handbook_
where it's something they tend to choose to learn later in life.

### Player's Handbook, 4th edition (2008)

D&D 4th edition made massive sweeping changes to the game, both mechanically and
thematically. Tieflings suddenly became a core race, and changed more radically
than any other race in the game.

Tieflings now all have large horns, long tails, pointed teeth, and eyes that are
solid orbs of colour. The art does not appeal to me. Horns cover the tiefling's
forehead and jut out like bony eyebrows. Male tieflings have ugly flesh beards.
Despite having access to the same range of skin tones as humans, the most common
colour appears to be salmon pink.

The race consists exclusively of the descendants of Bael Turath, a fallen empire
whose leaders made pacts with devils and became the first tieflings. They like
to wear dark colours, reds, furs, spikes and buckles, and almost exclusively
wield jagged and curved blades.

Tieflings have their own names (what langauge these are in is a mystery), but
a recent fad has young tieflings choose an adjective in the common language as
their name, like "Poetry" or "Sorrow".

They are slow to trust, but form strong bonds with a select few (their
adventuring party); this is different to earlier editions, where they trust
nobody, not even other tieflings.

Tieflings now have bonuses to Intelligence and Charisma, unlike the 3e tiefling
who actually had a penalty to Charisma and favoured rogue.

### Player's Handbook Races: Tieflings (2010)

The origin story of tieflings is expanded upon here. Hundreds of nobles,
including the head of nearly every noble house, took part in a month-long ritual
named the Bloodfire Moon, in which they were transformed into the first
tieflings.

Tieflings breed true with humans; anyone with one tiefling parent is a tiefling.

The descendants of a particular noble house suffer a curse where they sweat
blood (a potentially lethal affliction) unless they execute a condemned criminal
once a month. Alternatively, they can avoid this by simply wearing red.

### Player's Handbook, 5th edition (2014)

Although 5th edition returned a lot of D&D to a pre-4th edition ethos, the weird
pink tieflings stay.

A notable difference is that tieflings are no longer intrinsically evil. They're
distrusted for their appearance, but their hearts are fundamentally human. They
tend to respond to that distrust by redoubling their efforts to prove
themselves, rather than becoming angsty loners. 5e tieflings are more positive.

5e's tieflings are all infernal tieflings, ancestors of humans who made a pact
to infuse the essence of Asmodeus into their bloodline. An Unearthed Arcana
article provides a variant for the Abyssal tiefling, who gains a bonus to
Constitution instead of Intelligence, among other differences.[^12] This matches
with the 4e tiefling who would later be given the option to choose Con instead
of Int.

While they're still a core race in 5e, tieflings are uncommon, along with
dragonborn, gnome, half-elf and half-orc. Gnome's rarity may surprise 3e
players who knew it as a core race, but it was nearly cut from the PHB at one
point[^13], I seem to recall for being too similar to the halfling, and put back
in when Greyhawk became 3e's core setting. Tiefling and dragonborn are uncommon
because they didn't appear as core races until 4e, and thus don't appear heavily
in most D&D settings.

## Opinion

### New vs old

The 4e-style tiefling really addresses two issues with the original Planescape
race: it's too visually similar to the human, and it never really explained how
fiendish blood got into their ancestry when fiends don't sexually reproduce.

The drawback is that it does away with the concept of a tiefling who can hide in
human society. It's also visually ugly. Most tieflings are depicted with salmon
pink skin, flesh beards, or horns that resemble huge eyebrows.

This style of tiefling actually pre-dates fourth edition, appearing in Dungeon
magazine's _Age of Worms_ series. The female iconic tiefling of that series has
a tail and flat horns that grow sideways from her forehead.

It's entirely possible that both types of tiefling exist. The concept can
equally apply to anyone with fiendish blood, whether by parentage or ritual.

### Tieflings and Acolyte of the Skin

There's a potential link between the tiefling and D&D 3e's
[Acolyte of the Skin](/rpg/books/tome-and-blood.html#acolyte-of-the-skin),
a prestige class introduced in _Tome and Blood_ and reprinted in _Complete
Arcane_.

The Acolyte of the Skin is an arcane spellcaster who uses a dark ritual to
replace his skin with a living fiend, giving him a progressively fiendish
appearance and power. Since this process is permanent, it's plausible that the
descendants of an Acolyte of the Skin would inherit this status.

The change in appearance depends on level, with 1st-level acolytes almost
indistinguishable from humans, and 10th-level appearing significantly monstrous.
Since the process is gradual and not all acolytes make the full progression,
it's possible that there's a great variety of appearance among acolyte
descendants.

This also provides a convenient explanation for why established settings
suddenly gained a lot of tieflings. Most are humans who were introduced to the
Ritual of Bonding to increase their power.

### Tieflings in Greyhawk

Practically all of Greyhawk was written before tieflings officially became a
playable race, and for most of that time the race was limited to the Planescape
setting. As a result, there's very little official lore on tieflings in
Greyhawk.

One plausible answer is that tieflings always existed in Greyhawk; they just
tend to look like ordinary humans. Some reached adulthood before discovering
that they weren't wholly human. A number of major human figures were in fact
secretly tieflings.

A particular location for tieflings is the United Kingdom of Ahlissa, whose
dealings with fiends (see _Ivid the Undying_) led to many power-hungry human
nobles becoming tiefling by way of infernal pacts. Other tieflings were summoned
as extraplanar mercenaries, and while most were banished in 586 CY during the
Flight of Fiends, their offspring born on Oerth are native to this world. Many
such tieflings grew up as war orphans and are old enough now to become
adventurers themselves.

## Footnotes

[^1]:
    Planescape Campaign Setting (1994), a Player's Guide to the Planes,
    page 12.

[^2]:
    Planescape, Monstrous Compendium Appendix (1994), page 112.

[^3]:
    The Planewalker's Handbook (1996), page 78.

[^4]:
    "A shadow of knife-edge in their face, a little too much fire in their eyes,
    a scent of ash in their presence &ndash; all these things and more describe
    a tiefling." -- Planescape Campaign Setting (1994)

[^5]:
    "...tieflings are enshrouded with mysteries of an unnamed heritage ... You
    don't know who your ancestors were, and you don't care. So what if
    somewhere in your family's distant past one of them was a fiend or other
    such creature?" --  The Planewalker's Handbook (1996)

[^6]:
    "And in addition to the new feats, we created some twists on familiar
    races -- including a system where PCs of powerful races, such as drow,
    don't always overshadow more "normal" PCs such as humans."
    -- Sean K Reynolds, [New rules for the Forgotten Realms](http://archive.wizards.com/default.asp?x=dnd/fr/20001213b) (2000)

[^7]:
    "I helped come up with the current LA system so I'm partial to in and I
    know it inside and out, and I think it's a reasonable way of balancing the
    races." -- Sean K Reynolds, [Why XP Penalties Don't Work for Level Adjustment Races](http://www.seankreynolds.com/rpgfiles/rants/LAvsXPpenalty.html) (2005)

[^8]:
    "An example is the drow elf. Drow have a CR adjustment of "class level +1"
    and a LA of +2. Thus, an NPC drow Ftr5 has a CR of 6. However, that drow Ftr5 as
    a PC is treated as a 7th-level character (5 class levels plus the LA adjustment
    of +2 = 7). This is because the drow's spell resistance and other magical
    abilities are more valuable if he gets to use them over and over again, which he
    will get to do as a PC because he's played in multiple sessions, instead of
    being killed after one fight if he were a "monster." -- Sean K Reynolds,
    [Effective Character Level and Challenge Ratings](http://www.seankreynolds.com/rpgfiles/misc/ecl_vs_cr.html) (2004)

[^9]:
    "In this way, they are a more extreme example than the half-elves (who also
    rarely have their own communities) because of their rarity and varied
    backgrounds." -- Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting (2001), page 18.

[^10]:
    [Level-Adjusted Races](http://archive.wizards.com/default.asp?x=dnd/sp/20040213a)

[^11]:
    [Transition Classes](http://archive.wizards.com/default.asp?x=dnd/sp/20040319a)

[^12]:
    [Unearthed Arcana: That Old Black Magic](https://media.wizards.com/2015/downloads/dnd/07_UA_That_Old_Black_Magic.pdf)

[^13]:
    "By the time a year and a half had passed, we had written-mostly together-an
    entire Player's Handbook and a bit of the DMG. But we threw practically all of
    that out -- the rules were evolving fast and furious. What we had been calling
    "C skills" (as opposed to A and B skills) became "Heroic Feats," and finally,
    just "feats." The spirit master went away, and the sorcerer appeared.
    Multiclassing was out, and then back in. Gnomes were killed, and then
    raised." -- Monte Cook, [Full Circle, Part 1](https://web.archive.org/web/20070818111505/http://www.montecook.com/arch_lineos1.html) (2001)
