---
title: "Tome and Blood"
categories: rpg books
---

_Tome and Blood_ (2001) was one of the first Dungeons & Dragons splatbooks[^1],
and the first to grab my imagination. Although early D&D 3e books generally
suffered weaker balance, the lore in _Tome and Blood_ evokes a D&D world which
not only canonically possesses variant forms of wizardry, may possess any number
of undiscovered others.

{{ toc }}

## Origins

The list of sources of _Tome and Blood_ is interesting.

After the TSR buyout in 1997 but before the launch of D&D 3e in 2000, Wizards of
the Coast published several late-era AD&D 2e books under the TSR brand. Some of
these would go on to inspire D&D 3e content and even share the same writers.

One such book was [College of Wizardry](/rpg/books/college-of-wizardry.html)
(1998), a wizard class book describing a guild called the Arcane Order,
headquartered in Mathghamhna[^2], a castle carved from an extinct volcano.
_College of Wizardry_ author [Bruce Cordell](/rpg/people/bruce-cordell.html) was
also a designer on _Tome and Blood_.

## Splatbooks

Comparing the two books, we can see how _Tome and Blood_ represented a trend of
D&D books as character customization tools for players, something which would
come to dominate D&D 3e.

_College of Wizardry_ was almost all background detail on a particular guild. It
devotes only a few pages to character options: a nonweapon proficiency called
Aleph I resembling a precursor to what D&D 3e would call _metamagic_ (and indeed
_Tome and Blood_ credits the Arcane Order with the rediscovery of metamagic),
the Arcane Order's spell-sharing ability that re-appears in _Tome and Blood_,
and a few spells that were largely too dull to re-appear in any third edition
book onward.

By comparison, _Tome and Blood_ is all player based, with most of the book
dedicated to new character options like feats, spells and prestige classes. It
intentionally shifted the target market to players, since they're more numerous
than Dungeon Masters, and so the book sells more copies.

There are a few pages of lore, or "fluff", such as guild descriptions, but
nothing like the entire book _College of Wizardry_ dedicated to describing a
single guild. This trend would continue in D&D 3e with _Complete Arcane_ (2004)
having almost no fluff at all.

The dungeon master or player of today can still mine old D&D editions for
[lore](/rpg/lore.html), that is to say canon D&D inspiration as it appears
either in its descriptions of the world, or as ideas about the world implied by
the existence of game material.

## Organizations

### The Arcane Order

The amount of detail on this guild, with two pages of text and one page of maps,
is nothing compared to its depiction in _College of Wizardry_.

An ordinary guild for wizards and sorcerers, the Arcane Order's headquarters,
Mathghamhna, is carved into the side of an ancient volcano. Its focus is the
study of an ancient magical grammar called the Aleph, or Language Arcane, from
which the guild developed D&D 3e's metamagic. Members can "borrow" prepared
spells from each other via the guild's Spellpool.

[College of Wizardry](/rpg/books/college-of-wizardry.html) gives vastly greater
detail on the guild. Most notably, the guild's full name is The Arcane Order of
Enchantment & Exposition. Its founder, Japheth Arcane, named the guild after
himself. He originally gave himself the name Arcane as an apprentice when he
stumbled upon part of the Language Primeval by accident. Japheth is based on one
of Bruce Cordell's own D&D characters[^3], who would go on to appear in
Cordell's 2010 novel _Key of Stars_.

Maththamhna is considerably greater than described in _Tome and Blood_. It has
three towers, stands 435 feet above the ground and its basement extends 210 feet
below, plus further unexplored ruins. It is considerably more ancient than the
Arcane Order and was built during the Elder Age by the authors of the original
Languge Primeval.

### Beastchasers

A guild who collects creature lore. The kind of group you want to go to for
information on a specific creature. They also make a good plot hook: perhaps
they hire the PCs to hunt and capture a specific creature alive for study.

It makes me think of _Monster Hunter_, where you have an entire settlement of
magically advanced hunter-gatherers that rely on hunting to survive. A guild
hires adventurers to track and hunt powerful monsters, and an entire village's
economy is based around crafting mundane and magic items from creature parts.

### Bleak Academy

A necromancy guild, and one of the coolest groups in the book.

A common theme in D&D is that necromancy is shunned or associated with villains.
There are counter-examples to this stereotype, but the Bleak Academy is not one
of them. You can straight-up train in classes like blackguard and assassin here.
The leaders are said to be devils who steal the souls of the students with the
lowest marks.

What's most excellent about this guild's headquarters is its location: "in the
midst of a dreary swamp, built on the crypt of an ancient lich". _College of
Wizardry_ explicitly links this to the Tomb of Horrors.[^4]

### Broken Wands

Spellcaster assassins-for-hire. Their base of operations is a magically created
demiplane, and their leader is a white dragon with levels of rogue, sorcerer and
assassin named Winter who never leaves their headquarters without a magical
disguise.

You hire the Broken Wands simply by drawing the symbol of their guild in blood
on the inside of a door. Any door. They'll see it.

### Escriers

A bunch of lameoids who send each other messages with an expensive magical
brooch. Why not simply cast _sending_?

### League of Diviners

Spellcaster diviners-for-hire. This was back in D&D 3.0 when Scry was a skill.
Really useful as a group to hire when you have money and need information. Not
very interesting to be a member of, nor do they generally need to hire
adventurers to find out information for them, but perhaps some dungeon or
extraplanar location is proofed against scrying and they need real people to
physically go there.

I imagine the League to be extremely neutral. Knowledge is power, and it would
be significant if this group sided with one faction or the other in a conflict.
They've got to be either doing it independently for money (in which case
divination becomes a standard power any rich person can use), or purely for its
own sake (in which case they are dedicated only to their craft and care not for
the world of politics).

Members are required to meet once per year. The meeting location is not given
out. You have to divine it.

### The Queendom

A magical island nation which only grants citizenship to spellcasters. It sails
through the seas of the world like an enormous ship, with a population of around
10,000. Its ruler, Queen DiFate, is some kind of being beyond the power of
ordinary spellcasters.

This is the kind of thing I skimmed past when I first held a copy of _Tome and
Blood_ and only looked for character customization options. It's the kind of
element you can base a D&D adventure or an entire campaign around.

### Savants of the Flame

Tome and Blood introduced the idea of a transformation prestige class; one by
which your character gradually transforms into something other than human. The
Elemental Savant is one by which you master an element (such as fire) and
gradually become as an elemental of that type.

The Savants of the Flame are a group of this sort, whose base is built over an
active volcano. Only Elemental Savants, with their fire resistance, can survive
here.

One of their members has a toad familiar, but Elemental Savants' familiars don't
gain their master's fire resistance, so that's potentially a problem. Toads were
popular familiars in D&D 3.0 where they gave their owner +2 to Constitution,
compared to, say, a hawk, which gives you nothing. D&D 3.5 nerfed toad to +3 HP
(as Toughness feat).

The Savants are really a group who exist purely for their own craft. They do not
care for wealth (gold would melt in their volcano base) or power; they do not
work for kings or nations.

### Spellswords

Another group tied to a prestige class. I recall a game developer (Monte Cook?
I've forgotten) saying that prestige classes were definitely intended to be
linked to groups or guilds like this, and that this intent was broken by later
prestige classes like Mystic Theurge that didn't have any lore to them, as well
as players level-dipping into multiple prestige classes for the optimal build.
_Complete Arcane_ even suggests that high level members Arcane Order often
level-dip in multiple arcane prestige classes, something which would conflict
with their guild's own prestige class.

The spellswords are a guild who combine magic with combat. They hold an annual
fighting tournament, and every ten years the tournament's winner becomes the
Spellswords' new leader.

Although there's a Spellsword prestige class linked to this guild, it's not
exclusive to that guild. Nor do guildmembers necessarily need to be Spellswords.
It's also distinct from the Bladesinger, which is a fighter/arcane class
specifically for elves.

You can also hire Spellswords for 10gp per day, which I guess makes Spellswords
sellswords.

### Wayfarers' Union

A guild of hired teleporters. Teleporting is tricky in D&D 3e and you have a
high chance to land off-target if you aren't familiar with the area, so it helps
to hire an expert. They have a shop in every major city.

The existence of this implies a world where you can, for enough money, pay to
have yourself teleported to anywhere in the known world. They're essentially
operating the fantasy equivalent of an airline for the very rich.

This is a big deal for NPCs who don't have a party wizard to cast _teleport_, or
even parties who don't have a wizard (D&D 3e introduced sorcerers who have
limited spells known and can't afford to waste a high level slot on a non-combat
utility spell.

Guilds like the Diviners and Wayfarers suggest that for certain spells, at
least, guilds often spring up who will not only specialize in that field, but
offer that technology to anyone who can pay.

## Prestige classes

A general problem with early D&D 3e spellcaster prestige classes was that they
often had considerably less than 10/10 spellcasting progression, meaning that
you ultimately gave up your highest level spell slots in exchange for weak
abilities that don't scale with level.

Some call this a D&D 3.0 specific balance issue, but it's rather that earlier
D&D third edition material made mistakes that later writers knew to avoid, as
opposed to any changes specific to D&D 3.5.

Of course, we're still able to mine it for interesting lore. The question to ask
is, if people with this prestige class exist canonically, what does it say about
the world they inhabit?

### Acolyte of the Skin

One of the coolest prestige classes in all of third edition, and one which would
have lore implications later on.

The Acolyte of the Skin uses a secret and painful ritual to replace their skin
with a living demon. As they progress in the prestige class, they gradually
become more fiend-like in appearance and gain various powers.

Mechanically, this is a poor class. You have to be at least a fifth level wizard
to take Acolyte of the Skin, but only five of its ten levels grant spellcasting
progression. You end up at level 15 with the spellcasting of a 10th level
wizard, plus a set of 1/day special attacks that aren't as good as the 7th and
8th level magic you gave up. The Complete Arcane version raises the hit dice
from d4 to d8 but doesn't solve the essential problem.

But thematically? Acolyte of the Skin is amazing.

It's also a plausible origin story for tieflings. From D&D 4e onward, tieflings
were described as ancestors of people who made a pact with Asmodeus or some
fiend, and were transformed by ritual. The lore suggests that tieflings (at
least some) are either humans who conducted a ritual like this one, or are
descended from such a person.

Acolyte of the Skin suggests that tiefling is something a human can become with
the right ritual; changing a character's race to tiefling is already possible
with _reincarnate_, so a ritual which changes one's race is not unreasonable.

### Alienist

The Alienist is an arcane or divine spellcaster who delves too deep into
Lovecraftian mythos of the Far Realm, a distant plane at the edge of sanity
introduced to D&D canon by Bruce Cordell in _The Gates of Firestorm Peak_
(1996). It's likely no coincidence that it appears in this book.

The main features of the class are that his familiar and any creatures he
summons become pseudonatural creatures, whose true form is some eldritch horror
such as a mass of tentacles. The alienist himself develops pseudonatural
qualities and the cost of some sanity.

The Lovecraft mythos is so classic as to be cliche now, but it offers a pattern
for player characters to gain some benefit at the cost of some penalty. It's
also something that makes for an excellent opponent, like the insane cultist
stereotype.

The Alienist cements the Far Realm as a plane in D&D and other works would
establish that the Mind Flayers and psionics are linked to it.

### Arcane Trickster

Rogue/wizard multiclassing patch. It exists primarily to make that class
combination work, but the idea of a rogue/thief who uses mage hand to pick locks
at a distance is neat too. You've got this idea of a thief or spy who excels at
their craft by using magic.

### Bladesinger

An idea inspired by AD&D's _Complete Book of Elves_, the Bladesinger is an
elven warrior who also casts magic. Realistically, you play a level 5 fighter
with one level in wizard, and then gain useful combat spells without losing
swordfighting ability, almost like an arcane equivalent of the paladin.

In lore, this establishes that among the elves there are those who study both
magic and swordplay, remembering of course that elves in D&D 3e are
automatically proficient with the longsword.

The _Complete Book of Elves_ version of Bladesong makes no mention of magic,
only describing the subtle dancing style of movement, like a kind of elegant
equivalent to drunken fighting.

The closest D&D 5e version of this is the fighter Eldritch Knight path.

### Blood Magus

A mage who casts using their own blood as a spell component. Mechanically
worthless due to the 5/10 spellcasting, a lack of any especially powerful
abilities, and a hit point cost on most class abilities, but the Complete Arcane
version improves this to 8/10.

As an NPC, the blood magus is a remarkable character. First of all, you have an
entirely different style of magic, that suggests it developed separately and
perhaps due to necessity. He can scribe spells on his own skin, cast without
material components if captured, and teleport to freedom by jumping into one
person and out another.

### Candle Caster

A pointless prestige class who crafts scrolls in the form of candles. Crafting
still costs XP. Perhaps a reference to Dalstrom's Wondrous Candles, a set of
magical candles from _College of Wizardry_ that do things like store spells or
perform divinations by lighting when a certain trigger becomes true.

What it suggests is that there are or were candle casters at some point in
history who may have crafted these magical candles and left them behind for
people to find as treasure. The candles aren't readily identifiable by anyone
other than their creator, and are quite obscure things, so someone may find one
and light it without knowing which spell is in it, or even that it's magic at
all.

One wonders what necessitated the invention of candle casters. The class isn't
limited to arcane casters; in fact, it makes more sense for clerics who don't
get the wizard's free item creation feats. Did it originally hold religious
significance?

Of the core races, only humans and halflings lack good night vision, so the
spellcasters of these races would have the greatest need of candles. Perhaps
some people who lived underground or indoors in cities and guilds made heavy use
of candles and this inspired their magic. Perhaps some group were unable to
create scrolls, perhaps somewhere magic was outlawed and mages were forced to
hide their spells in more mundane form, or perhaps at one time paper and ink
were far too rare and expensive and candles were developed as a substitute.

### Dragon Disciple

Another transformation prestige class. This one turns you gradually into a
half-dragon over the course of ten levels. Immensely popular in our group, until
someone noticed you can just take half-dragon up front for a level adjustment of
+3.

Since D&D 4e and D&D 5e include dragonborn as a core race, the idea of starting
human to become a dragon-person seems unnecessary. Half-dragons or full dragon
disciples are considerably larger and more powerful creatures than dragonborn,
but unlike Acolyte of the Skin there's no real need in lore for dragonborn to
descend from transformed humans.

This is the kind of class that wouldn't be likely to appear in D&D 4e or 5e,
because it's so powerful that all your class abilities are "become more like a
dragon". Even D&D 3.5 would never have introduced this if it wasn't
grandfathered in in 3.0.

### Elemental Savant

Another transformation prestige class. You become an elemental, while also
matering spells of that element. So while you become a fire mage, you really do
become a fire mage.

Elementals are somehow "pure". They're not tricking people into dark pacts or
creating offspring with human consorts. Elemental Savants are simply mages (or
other classes - clerics, thematically even druids) who become beings of fire, or
water, or the like. They gradually become less a person, and more a force of
nature.

You get this sense that they tend to be neutral. Elemental Savants transcend
our world. That's true especially for the high level casters, but perhaps less
so for low-level ones. I can imagine some random warmage taking a few levels in
this just to be a specialist, without going all the way and transforming into an
elemental being.

Mechanically, this is a very good class for, say, a sorcerer. You lose nothing
and gain both resistances and straight-up bonuses to spell DCs. Not many deities
take an element as their domains.

### Fatespinner

A mage who twists fate. He mainly affects his own spell DCs by deliberately
taking a penalty in order to build up points which he can spend to increase DCs
or power his class abilities later.

Tactically interesting (and similar in function to [Iron
Heroes](/rpg/books/iron-heroes.html)' token system), but not very interesting to
encounter as an enemy in combat. The Complete Arcane version of this switches it
from 6/10 spellcasting to a five level class with spellcasting progression on
the first 4/5, very easy to take and broadly useful.

It would be more interesting to encounter a Fatespinner whose ability to change
fate allowed him to place curses and sense destiny in a broad way. I imagine
them as rare and enigmatic diviners.

### Mage of the Arcane Order

A wizard who joins a guild that lets them increase versatility by borrowing
spells from a common pool of energy. I've written about the Arcane Order earlier
in this article.

The D&D 5e Loremaster path[^5] is a good fit for this. It is a tradition of
mages who study the underlying mechanics of magic, and their abilities include
performing kind of metamagic, and swapping out one prepared spell for another.
This fits exactly with the Arcane Order. It shares a name with the D&D 3e
Loremaster prestige class, but it's mostly unrelated.

### Mindbender

A specialist in mind control. A mindbender makes a fantastic main villain
because of their ability to control others, both by magical and non-magical
means.

In my view, the thematic difference between a mindbender and an ordinary
Enchantment-specialist wizard is an obsession with control and power. A group
like the Scarlet Brotherhood would make excellent use of this kind of ability.
It's a subtle power that's best deployed for large, political goals.

The D&D 5e equivalent of this is the Enchantment-specialist wizard, who gains
certain Mindbender-like abilities.

### Pale Master

A necromancy specialist who gradually becomes more undead themselves. The back
of the book calls this class the Pale Apprentice, so I guess they changed it to
Master to sound cooler. At 5/10 spellcasting progression it's another
pointlessly weak _Tome and Blood_ prestige class, but thematically, it's
excellent.

This is a great concept for a villain or morally ambiguous player character.
It's only available to nongood characters and from level 5 onward he becomes
visibly undead, which is hard to hide in society without wearing dark hooded
robes everywhere (even in summer).

### Spellsword

A neat combination fighter/wizard class. Like a lot of the multiclass prestige
classes it's not very powerful, but interesting concept.

Unlike the elven Bladesinger, anyone can be a Spellsword. That opens it up to
any race or culture with a tradition of arcane magic. Canonically, it's taught
by a specific guild, but isn't necessarily tied to that guild. Their main
abilities are to cast spells through their weapon, and store spells in their
weapon.

This isn't a fighter/wizard multiclass patch; for that you want D&D 3.5's
Eldritch Knight, a flavourless class where a wizard essentially gains fighter
base attack and nearly full casting progression.

D&D 5e's Eldritch Knight is somewhat closer to the Spellsword, having limited
spell selection and the ability to wear armour. In D&D 5e, the Spellsword
guild would recruit and train Eldritch Knights. The implication is that the
guild's novices would begin as fighters before beginning any training in magic.

### True Necromancer

A wizard/cleric patch class to make multiclassing practical, with the added
benefit of becoming a specialist in raising undead. A reason for this to exist
is that evil clerics made better necromancers in D&D 3e than actual Necromancy
specialist wizards.

### Wayfarer Guide

You get better at casting _teleport_ spells. Useful if you're an NPC working at
the Wayfarer's Guild.

## Other content

Some of the spells and equipment in this book made it into later D&D editions,
especially via inclusion in D&D 3.5. The spell _lesser acid orb_ and its
variants made it to D&D 5e as _chromatic orb_, which very cleverly has a 50gp
focus cost to encourage you to use the more classic spells at level 1.

_Feign death_ first appeared under the name _peace of dissolution_ in _Bastion
of Faith_ (2000), a late-AD&D 2e book by, you guessed it, Bruce Cordell.

There's advice on crafting new spells and items. This is really important for
instilling in players a sense that it's absolutely possible to invent new
spells, and how to balance these in a way that doesn't break the game.

## Conclusions

Most prestige classes in _Tome and Blood_ are of two types: you gradually become
something other than human, or you multiclass in a way that normally doesn't
work. Another theme is you become really good at one specific type of magic.

Most guilds and organizations ask one of two questions: "We have this magic,
what should we do with it?" or "We have this problem, how can magic solve it?"
Some guilds get together to specialize in a field, only to find their skills are
in demand. Others specialize to sell a service. These are the types of guilds
that make the biggest changes to society.

The greatest lesson we learn from _Tome & Blood_ is that D&D expansion books
exist for two primary reasons: to provide game balance, and to inspire players.

## Footnotes

[^1]: Wikipedia gives the etymology of [splatbook](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Splatbook) as a general term for World of Darkness expansions like clanbooks, tribebooks and so on. Posters on USENET called these \*books, with the asterisk meaning "any" in computer jargon, and pronounced "splat" as per old computing slang. The term extended to mean any RPG expansion book to focus on one class, race or the like.

[^2]: Mathghamhna is an old Irish name, pronounced "Mahowna", according to [The
History of Ireland](https://books.google.com/books?id=qc0vAAAAMAAJ), said to be
originally a family name meaning "bear". According to _College of Wizardry_,
Mathghamhna means "College of Wizardry" in the language of the Elders who
created the fortress, but like many D&D names, no canon pronunciation is given.
Another Irish language reference is the tower, Briocht, meaning a charm or
spell.

[^3]: Interviewer: "Can you tell us about your past D&D games?  What kind of
games did you run?  Who was your favorite character to play?" Bruce: "I've had
several favorite characters, hard to pick just one. Japheth the warlock ..." -- [7 Questions with Bruce R Cordell](https://artificersintuition.blogspot.com/2013/07/7-questions-with-bruce-r-cordell.html)

[^4]: "It is whispered among the apprentices that Drake made some vague threat
of renewing his dark studies in a Black Academy of foul sorcery in the vast
swamp far to the south, but nothing more has been heard from him or the Black
Academy of which he spoke (however, see _Return to the Tomb of Horrors_)." --
_College of Wizardry_, page 30.

[^5]: https://media.wizards.com/2017/dnd/downloads/20170213_Wizrd_Wrlck_UAv2_i48nf.pdf
