---
title: Metal Gear deep lore
category: games mgs
redirect-from: /games/metal-gear-deep-lore.html
---

Considerable spoilers follow for most of the Metal Gear series.

## Snake dies at the end of MGS4

Kojima always intended for MGS4 to be the end of Solid Snake.[^1] An early idea
was that Snake and Otacon would turn themselves in to be executed for their
crimes[^2], referenced in the end theme "Here's To You", a 1971 a song about two
anarchists sentenced to death. 

In the finished game, Solid Snake appears to shoot himself at the end to prevent
the spread of mutant FOXDIE virus, only for a post-credits scene to reveal that
he changes his mind at the last second, discovers Big Boss is still alive, and
lives on to usher in a new era. But that's not the ending Kojima originally
wanted.

Kojima ordered an unexpected last-minute dialogue change to Sunny's ending
lines.[^3] The original line, "Snake, Hal, they're ready!" was changed to
"Everyone, hurry! They're ready!", to make it ambiguous who Sunny is talking to.
Kojima intentionally made it ambiguous whether Snake ever returned.

How could Snake have survived? We see him load a live round, and hear the gun
fire. Nobody would have sabotaged his gun to jam: Otacon accepted Snake's
decision, Sunny didn't know, Drebin only cares for money, and nobody else knew.
The joke answer is that Snake was holding a ration, but game logic and humour
don't apply to serious scenes like this.

It's possible that Snake pulled the gun away at the last second and fired, but
in a stressful situation an expert soldier like Snake is likely to fall back on
his training and eject the cartridge instead. Since he did fire, the most
plausible outcome is that Snake died.

### Heavens Divide

The Sorrow (MGS3) suggests that spirits are real in the Metal Gear universe.
Warriors in Kojima's universe don't pass on to Valhalla, or any place that would
glorify battle. They remain trapped in a purgatory of their own sin and regret
until they're able to let go of the past. It is a battlefield that can only be
defeated by peace.

This is where Solid Snake meets Big Boss.

Big Boss carries the Patriot, the weapon with which he was forced to kill the
Boss (MGS3). It's purely symbolic: he left the real one at The Boss' grave
in 1964. He can't pass on until he puts it down and makes peace with his enemies
in life: Solid Snake (the son who killed him twice) and Zero.

Solid Snake only ever considered three people his friends or family: Big Boss,
Gray Fox, and Otacon. He already made his peace with Otacon before he left, and
Gray Fox isn't here since already accepted death in MGS1.

But Snake, who has already given up fighting, still has two regrets: that he did
not make peace with Big Boss, and that the mutated FOXDIE prevents him from
seeing the era of peace he helped create. Big Boss absolves him of both before
passing on.

### Plot holes

Big Boss says certain things that make no sense, except to rationalize this
situation in ways that Solid Snake can understand. If Big Boss was asleep until
the System was destroyed[^4], when did he get a chance to learn about FOXDIE
from Naomi[^5], who died before Snake destroyed the AI? Even then, why would
Naomi tell Big Boss but not Snake? Why would FOXDIE have killed EVA and
Ocelot[^6] even though they were unharmed after prolonged contact with Snake and
only died after serious injury? 

But the biggest issue is that Big Boss doesn't try to stop Solid Snake from
shooting himself. The only logical explanation is that Big Boss wasn't there
_until_ Snake pulled the trigger. Big Boss died in 1999 and has been waiting the
entire time to be re-united with his son.

## The Boss lives at the end of MGS3

All warfare is based on deception.

Naked Snake's orders in MGS3 are to kill The Boss, while her orders are to be
killed. Instead of simply taking the hit, she carries out a suspiciously
elaborate plan where she shows up on a horse, briefs Snake on her goal to unite
the world, explains her new goal to retire to civilian life, fires a nuke so
nobody will visit the scene of the fight for 50 years, calls in an airstrike to
destroy all evidence, then duels Snake before being shot by her own gun.

We only see the _Metal Gear_ games from the perspective of the protagonist,
Snake[^7], whichever Snake that happens to be. Anything Snake sees, we see.
Anything Snake doesn't know, we don't know. Snake is pretty dumb[^8], while The
Boss is literally the military genius who invented special forces and taught
Snake everything he knows.

It would be trivial for The Boss to outsmart Snake, and since they fought in
such a remote location, she only needs to fool him to _fake her own death_. As
long as she doesn't show her face in the US, Europe, Russia or China, The Boss
can fulfil her dream of living out her years as a civilian woman while Snake
gets on with uniting the world.

In _Peace Walker_, Dr. Strangelove finds The Boss' horse in the Middle East. It
doesn't obey any master or accept anyone but The Boss as a rider, meaning unless
it rode all that way by itself, The Boss survived her duel with Snake and rode
it there.

The Boss is the woman who literally invented modern stealth warfare, and would
have no trouble exfiltrating a country by land without being spotted. Nobody
will notice that neither her body nor her horse were ever found: she prepared a
nuke to prevent anyone searching the area, and an airstrike to ensure nobody
would find anything even if they did. Her cover would remain intact if either
the nuke or the airstrike fell through somehow.

But how did she survive? Snake shot her at point blank range, yes, but with her
own gun. The Boss could easily have loaded her gun with a blank round after she
fell in the flowers at the end of the fight.

Recall early on how Ocelot jammed a semi-automatic weapon by trying to insert a
bullet into the open bolt on a semi-automatic weapon. Remember also how Ocelot's
"guns" gesture resembles the CQC stance exclusive to people trained by The Boss,
and it's easy to conclude Ocelot saw her training this technique for her fight
with Snake.

Consider also that after he shoots, Snake experiences what can only make sense
as a hallucation: the white flowers turning red, and the long scar on The Boss'
chest moving through the grass like a snake. Plausible explanations are extreme
stress, and that flowers with psychotropic effects, as certain types of Star of
Bethlehem are known to have ; remember that The Boss deliberately selected this
flower patch as the site of battle.

In any case, if Snake is suffering from hallucinations like this, he could
easily miss something like the Patriot being loaded with a blank round.

Since the game takes place from Snake's point of view, the player ever learns
that The Boss faked her own death, and that's exactly as she planned. Her final
mission, to fake her own death, de-exfiltrate from the Soviet Union in secret
and retire, was completed perfectly.

## The name of The Boss' horse

Supposing soldiers have an afterlife in the Kojima-verse, it's not unthinkable
that horses do too. Perhaps one where they are a kind of equine royalty, beloved
by all horses.

What does a former astronaut name her horse? _Celestia_.[^9]

## Quiet survives in MGSV

At the end of _Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain_, Quiet breaks her vow of
silence to direct a rescue helicopter to Snake's position, saving him from a
deadly snakebite but condemning herself to death since she's infected with the
parasite strain triggered the by English language.

First, let me rant how stupid this scene is. Snake is bitten by a snake despite
wearing (in my playthrough) heavy bulletproof armour, then tries to perform a
serious scene despite wearing (in my playthrough) the _chicken hat_[^10].

Quiet then uses English to guide in the rescue helicopter. Why? Most Mother base
staff speak at least four languages, and they're random African mercenaries.
Didn't Quiet, an elite assassin operating in Soviet-occupied Afghanistan who
will die if she speaks English, think to start learning Russian? Couldn't she
just hum in Morse code?

A better question is this: Why does Quiet believe Skull Face when he says she's
infected with the English strain of the vocal cord parasite?

According to the tapes, Skull Face lies about everything, including,
specifically, infecting a Navajo with the English strain of the vocal cord
parasite.[^11]

But an even better is that according to an interview with the author of the
official MGSV novelization, Kojima said, on Quiet, "She's not dead".[^12]

## Metal Gear Survive is purgatory

In Kojima's world, war is burdensome, not glorious; if soldiers meet each other
in the afterlife, it is a purgatory where they are trapped until they learn to
forgive the past.

In _Ground Zeroes_, Mother Base was ambushed by faceless, unknown enemies who
sank entire platforms with C4 on the struts. Hundreds of soldiers died unfairly
and without purpose, and their spirits were unable to pass on.

In the afterlife of Kojima's world, soldiers see things in terms of what they
knew in life, rationalized and detailed with symbolism that they can understand
and come to terms with.

So in _Metal Gear Survive_, soldiers cling to the scene of the Mother Base
platform they died on, rationalized as being beamed up into some wormhole to
another world. There they fight faceless enemies, representing the enemy they
weren't able to fight in real life.

## Gas Snake

After MGS1's release, fans suggested that Solid and Liquid Snake have a secret
third brother, Gas Snake. (In fact the third brother appears in MGS2: Solidus, a
word referring to the dividing line between solid and liquid.)

Try to count all the Snakes in the series; that is to say, soldiers given the
codename Snake. Most will say five: Solid Snake, Liquid Snake, Solidus Snake,
Naked Snake (Big Boss), and Punished 'Venom' Snake (also Big Boss; it's
complicated).

But there's a sixth: Raiden, who is briefly called "Snake" at the start of Metal
Gear Solid 2 before Colonel Campbell instructs him to change his codename to
Raiden.

We never learn what Raiden's full codename was before MGS2.

What if it's Gas Snake?

## Footnotes

[^1]:
    "In the Guns Of The Patriots he was supposed to die ... Everyone on the
    staff really wanted to keep him alive, so I caved a little." -- Hideo
    Kojima, [Official Playstation Magazine interview](https://web.archive.org/web/20111125190220/http://www.officialplaystationmagazine.co.uk:80/2011/11/24/kojima-on-metal-gear-solid-i-wanted-to-end-it-at-every-step-along-the-way/).

[^2]:
    "One of my ideas [for MGS4's ending] was that, since Snake and Otacon are
    breaking the law in order to fulfill their justice, I was thinking of having
    them turn themselves in, and for the sake of justice, they'd get convicted and
    executed by the law ... But all of my staff went against the idea,
    so I decided not to go with that." -- Hideo Kojima, [via Gamespot](https://web.archive.org/web/20100801091218/http://www.gamespot.com:80/news/6179757.html).

[^3]:
    [MGS4 Documentary](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2nM7TLbs6fE&t=27m40s), 27:40

[^4]:
    Big Boss: "I was implanted with nanomachines... Kept in a state of eternal
    sleep... By JD the proxy AI. They had me sealed away completely... Not only my
    physical body, but my will, too. ... For me to wake again... the System had to
    be destroyed... One way or another."

[^5]:
    Big Boss: "Naomi... She told me... Everything."

[^6]:
    Big Boss: "Truth is... The FOXDIE in you... Is what killed EVA... And Ocelot."

    Solid Snake: "What are you talking about?"

[^7]:
    Raiden used the codename Snake at the beginning of MGS2 before being
    ordered to change his codename to Raiden.

[^8]:
    Snake thinks eating mushrooms can charge your battery. He likes hiding in
    cardboard boxes. He eats rotten food. He sneaks through the jungle in
    blackface and a labcoat. He once signed up to stand near an atomic blast.

[^9]:
    I'm sorry

[^10]:
    The mission before this is an unreasonably difficult.

[^11]:
    [Secret Recording of Skull Face and Code Talker](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BvR9bu-qOz0)

[^12]:
    "Afterwards, Kojima pointed out, 'She's not dead'. In the game it's not
    clear." [Interview with Nojima and Manjome over the new MGS novels](https://www.reddit.com/r/NeverBeGameOver/comments/3qbutj/interview_with_nojima_and_manjome_over_the_new/cwe2vjp/)

