---
title: "The failure of D&D 4th edition"
categories: rpg rules
---

The design failings of _Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition_ (2008-2013) are
well-worn terrain by now, and the unprecedented success of _5th edition_
suggests we might simply consign discussion of 4e to RPG history and get on with
the new game.

However, I think it's worth learning from the mistakes 4e made, and explaining
why it was so controversial at the time. Additionally, it's worth discussing the
innovations of D&D 4e that actually did work, and the ideas that still hold
relevance to modern players.

1. Table of Contents
{:toc}

## Background

D&D 3.5 players and designers had begun to notice flaws in the edition's design.
Unlike AD&D 1st edition, which was playtested at high level where the most
power issues tend to lie, D&D third edition was playtested mainly at low level,
where most D&D play takes place. High-level play was the least well balanced.
Many radical changes were made in the design of third edition, and the large
number of profitable player-focused supplemental sourcebooks led to unintended
overpowered combinations and a focus on character building as the primary
function in player success. Challenge rating was a rough measurement at best.

Wizards of the Coast was aware of these issues, as were writers at Paizo
Publishing's magazines _Dragon_ and _Dungeon_, during the period when Wizard of
the Coast licensed the magazines to them. For example, the Mad Marquis Querchard
(_Dungeon_ #117, _Touch of the Abyss_, p.57) is a solo sorcerer who fights from
behind the bars of his jail cell, a necessary defensive advantage because the
official D&D 3.5 challenge rating of CR = Level is largely inaccurate;
similarly, Dragotha (_Dungeon_ #134, _Into the Wormcrawl Fissure_, p.83) has an
arbitrary ability called Unholy Toughness to boosts its hit points from 240 to
832 in order to be challenge-appropriate.

Before he was a lead designer on D&D 4th edition, Mike Mearls write two
sourcebooks for Malhavoc Press that defined him as one of the greatest experts
in the D&D 3.5 rules: _The Book of Iron Might_ (2004), in which he deconstructed
the combat system and presented rules for combat maneuvers and combat skill
uses; and _Iron Heroes_ (2005), a variant set of all-martial character classes
giving interesting combat options to non-spellcaster classes. Mearls'
understanding of the 3.5 rules impressed Wizards of the Coast enough to hire
him. His inclusion on the D&D 4th edition design team was seen as a reason for
optimism.

However, Wizards of the Coast's corporate side had also acquired something of a
negative reputation for chasing profit at the cost of creative staff. It was
common for the company to fire talented writers late in the year, supposedly to
balance the books for WotC's parent company Hasbro, a toy company who counts
their financial year ending in December after Christmas. Many former employees
would go on to found competing companies, including Monte Cook's Malhavoc Press.
There was a sense that Wizards tended to fire senior writers who were confident
enough in their abilities to butt heads with the management, who were more in
turn focused on company goals like annual profit. The result was that Wizards of
the Coast's senior staff tended to be yes-men who would put the company's goals
ahead of D&D community.

The result was that, while there was a great deal of optimism about D&D 4th
edition ahead of its release, players began to notice flaws.

## Flaws of D&D 4th edition
### Mandatory miniatures use

In an interview at Gen Con 2007, Mike Mearls responded to concerns that D&D 4th
edition was turning D&D into more of a miniatures game than a roleplaying game.
Mearls said:[^1]

> "Making it more like a board game or a miniatures game defeats the purpose of
> having D&D. Really, miniatures are no more necessary now than they were in
> third edition. [...] If you don't use minis now, you're not going to feel
> like, 'well, now I have to have minis'. That's not changing at all.

As late as March 2008, Mearls still insisted that playing without minis was
possible:[^2]

> If you played 3e without miniatures, you'll have no problem with 4e.

When the D&D 4th edition _Player's Handbook_ was released in June 2008,
miniatures were mandatory. The book's introduction states:

> Miniatures: Each player needs a miniature to represent his or her character,
> and the DM needs minis for monsters. Official _D&D Miniatures_ are custom-made
> to be used with the D&D game.

Page 6 of the _Dungeon Master's Guide_ concurs, including miniatures in its list
of "what you need to play". In fact, it lists _D&D Miniatures_ in italics,
meaning the official D&D brand miniatures. Either a battle grid or _D&D Dungeon
Tiles_ are also required. Unbelievably, character sheets are listed as optional.

Miniatures had been completely optional in D&D 3.0. The D&D 3.5 _Player's
Handbook_ changed its introduction to say "The game assumes the use of
miniatures and a battle grid, and the rules are written from this perspective",
but this was largely an attempt to sell more minitures, as the core combat rules
had not changed from 3.0.

The 4e combat rules not only assumed the use of miniatures, but were based
inherently around the use of miniatures and a square grid. Combat now used
multiple enemies by default, drawing intentional influence from the _D&D
Miniatures_ skirmish game, as mentioned by James Wyatt in _Wizards Presents:
Worlds and Monsters_, p.10. Many combat powers used by both PCs and monsters
relied on specific measurements of distance or area to be meaningful, including
many short range attacks, area effects, multi-target effects separated by a
limited distance, and forced movement.

The result was that miniatures were absolutely required in D&D 4e for core
combat mechanics to be meaningful. Miniatures are only optional in the sense
that you could in theory homebrew an alternative.

Now, miniatures are not inherently a bad way to play D&D. The main problem is
that by making them mandatory, Wizards of the Coast alienated players who either
couldn't or didn't want to play with miniatures. I suspect this was motivated
more by the company's desire to sell miniatures than by any overwhelming demand
among D&D players. A lot of groups didn't want to play with miniatures.

Even for groups who do play with them, miniatures have drawbacks. The most
obvious is expense. To play as intended, you need miniatures for every
encounter, including multiples of the same creature. To run a specific adventure
module, you need specific monsters. For example, HS1 _The Slaying Stone_
requires (by my count) at least 39 individual miniatures for a 32-page
adventure. Even at $1 per mini, you would spend twice as much on minis than on
the adventure ($14.95).

In practice, I've never known a D&D group who had every miniature. You could in
theory buy nearly every miniature - of maybe 153 monster entries in the 4e
_Monster Manual_, only about 5 did not have any miniature in WotC's official
line by 2010 (I count Cambion, Colossus, Doppelganger, Homunculus, and Larva
Mage). In practice, everyone just substituted other things at least some of the
time: other miniatures, pieces from other board games, coins, dice, or clever
[inexpensive home-made pogs](https://newbiedm.com/2008/11/22/newbiedm-tutorial-counters-tokens-or-pogs/).

Even if you wanted to buy miniatures, it was complicated by the way Wizards of
the Coast sold their own miniatures line in random blind boxes. For example, the
_Demonweb_ booster pack contained 8 random miniatures and cost $14.99.[^3] If
you wanted a specific monsters, such as a guard drake, you had to buy multiple
boxes and hope the other creatures were something you could use in your
campaign, or find a way to build your campaign around those monsters. In
practice, the main way a lot of people bought minis was via resellers on ebay.

Consider also that responsibility for buying miniatures in many groups is up to
the DM. I've heard of some groups where the players chip in to buy miniatures,
but this probably isn't the norm. The DM usually puts the most time and money
into a D&D game, so in practice it's asking a lot to have them spend even more
money.

For developers at Wizards of the Coast, ready access to their own company's
miniatures was no problem. The D&D team had become so isolated from the
experience of the ordinary D&D player (something Mearls would admit in his
_Legends & Lore_ web article series when he was put in charge of building D&D
4th edition's successor) that it may not have occurred to them that a massive
percentage of players were not able to play the game as designed.

Wizards of the Coast's designers made an edition of D&D that satisfied corporate
management, but not the actual customers of the game.

This is all not mentioning the digital gametable, which never came out, in part
due to Wizards of the Coast's decision to make all their own software in-house
and underestimation of their ability as a tabletop games company to produce
software. Popular digital gametable Roll20 was not launched until 2012, four
years after D&D 4th edition's launch, by which point Wizards of the Coast were
already working on 5th edition.

While the digital gametable could have saved players the difficulty and expense
of buying miniatures, it would also have been a massive undertaking. Every
Monster Manual released would require Wizards of the Coast to 3D model around
150 new creatures. Of course, most D&D groups probably played in-person, and
could not have used these digital gametables. Those who did play online would
have been used to non-miniature play, and 4e's miniature requirement was an
unwelcome imposition.

### Slow combat

In my experience, combat in Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition took substantially
longer than in 3.5, and this did not enhance gameplay. Several mechanical
factors caused this.

Both monsters and player characters tended to have high amounts of hit points
relative to their damage output, creating an effect known in the community as
"padded sumo". The players spend more rounds in combat, but this does not make
the game more enjoyable. In fact, it slows overall progress in the dungeon.

Wizards of the Coast eventually accepted that this was a flaw in the system,
notably re-issuing solo monsters with around 20% fewer hit points. Compare, for
example, the Elder Red Dragon in _Monster Manual_ (HP 1,050, AC 40) and the same
creature in the later _Monster Vault_ (HP 832, AC 38). Wizards should have known
this was an issue; I once heard from someone during the 4e playtest that WotC
were thought to be A/B testing slightly higher and lower HP versions of
creatures, with the playtester reporting that combat had too many hit points.

D&D 4e also has multiple opponents as a standard feature. A typical first-level
encounter of four standard kobold skirmishers has a combined total of 135 hit
points, but the fighter's standard damage is no higher than it was in D&D 3.5.
4e's role-based design does intend for fighters to serve primarily as decoys to
protect higher-damage striker classes, but the number of combat rounds is still
high.

Characters also have more actions in each turn, making each round take longer.
Optimal play often means selecting a Minor power in addition to your Standard,
and you can use your Move action to use another Minor action. You're also
tracking more reactions and interrupts.

You also have more powers to choose from, and that adds thinking time. If you do
your thinking on other players' turns, you're not paying attention to things
like which status effects are in play. But another problem is that you can
easily run out of Daily and Encounter powers while the combat is ongoing, and
now you are using low-damage At-Will powers, which makes combat take longer.

Wizards of the Coast ought to have known about all of these problems, because
they were known issues with D&D 3.5 at high character levels. D&D 3.5 players
handled it with heavy use of insta-kill spells and super-optimized characters,
but these options were eliminated in 4e for balance. Many 3.5 players also
handled it by ending campaigns before level 20 (e.g. the original Pathfinder
adventure paths for D&D 3.5) or playing low-level variants (i.e. E6).

Long combat isn't an issue for something like the _D&D Miniatures_ skirmish
game, where that's the entire game, but D&D players traditionally want
exploration and progress.

### Difficulty tracking status effects

Another problem, which also contributes to slows combat, is that D&D 4e has a
large number of status effects to track. It actually has fewer unique status
conditions than D&D 3.5 (16 versus 38), but they are used much more frequently.

Most combat powers grant some side-effect which must be tracked. Either the DM
tracks this, or the players do. In my experience, the DM has to focus a lot of
their attention on accounting paperwork for these status effects, ongoing
damage, and event triggers. In my experience, both DMs and players forget to
apply them.

For example, the cleric's Lance of Faith power damages a target and grants one
ally a +2 power bonus to their next attack against the same target. The ally
must now track which enemy it is and remember to apply the bonus, if they want
to attack it. The party may spend extra time discussing the most optimal target,
which slows play.

The status effects often don't matter. A +2 bonus to hit is nice to have, but in
practice it only results in an additional hit when you would have missed by 2 or
less. About 90% of the time you either missed by more than 2, or hit without the
bonus. In other words, Lance of Faith does nothing most of the time. In some
instances, you may even have another power bonus to hit, making Lance of Faith
useless. This is not just a problem with Lance of Faith, but with the entire use
case of +1 or +2 bonuses which must be tracked.

Another problem is that D&D 4e does not include any standard way to track status
effects accurately and communicate them to the players. A video game will do
this easily, such as with icons above each creature's head, and will
automatically apply effects even if the player forgets. D&D 4e doesn't have
this. There's no way to view status at-a-glance, so it's trivial to forget to
apply a status, activate a trigger, or end an ongoing effect at the correct
time. The DM may have to keep the entire game state in their head, without a
reliable way to convey this information to players in a way that is useful.

In my experience as a D&D 4e DM, I found myself spending a lot of time and
mental effort manually tracking the complex game state, and could not do this
accurately. Triggers also led to confusion tracking initiative order by giving
actions to characters out of turn.

### Skill challenges

Skill challenges were a mechanic by which multiple skill checks could be
required to achieve a success.

This was not necessarily a bad concept. Skill challenges traced their origin to 
[complex skill checks](https://www.d20srd.org/srd/variant/buildingCharacters/complexSkillChecks.htm),
an optional mechanic appearing in the D&D 3e sourcebook _Unearthed Arcana_:

> Complex skill checks allow the game master to build suspense in critical
> situations, add tension to multiple-round tasks during combat, enhance
> special adventure-specific tasks, and resolve complex activities more
> quickly.

> To build suspense with complex skill checks, the game master can simply
> substitute a complex skill check for a normal skill check during a critical
> task. In most such situations, using a complex check lessens the likelihood
> that one failed roll will cause the party a significant setback.

D&D 3.5's complex skill checks generally represented a single person making
discrete progress toward a greater goal, such as training an animal over
multiple weeks or disarming a trap with multiple components. Players decided
what they were rolling for and understood how each roll contributed to the
overall goal.

D&D 4e's skill challenges took this mechanic and allowed the entire party to
contribute to a single complex skill check, and to use multiple different
skills. This causes problems that may not be immediately obvious.

Allowing different skills means that progress is abstract and meta, rather than
representing anything in-world. If a skill challenge requires twelve successes
and allows Athletics and Arcana, it doesn't matter how many of each you do, as
long as you do twelve in total.

The implementation also makes some questionable choices.

The skills which may be used, and what those skills do, are designated in
advance. DMs are advised that they can allow other skills, but at a higher DC.
The DM is advised to tell the players up-front what skills will be necessary.

Skill challenges were structured like combats, with initiative order, and
participation is mandatory (_DMG_ p.74). If your character doesn't have relevant
skills, you're forced to take part anyway, meaning that you're weighing the
party down.

To give an example, in HS1 _The Slaying Stone_, the party must complete a skill
challenge to sneak through a town without being spotted. Any twelve checks
succeed. Twelve Athletics checks to swim the city's canals will do as well as
twelve Dungeoneering checks to navigate through the city. Streetwise would seem
more logical, but is arbitrarily capped at only one success. Acrobatics to run
along rooftops won't work at all, because it's not a listed skill. Diplomacy
will grant a success, but Intimidate won't. Some skills are DC 12, others DC 17,
and it's not clear to the players which are which, or why.

In terms of gameplay, skill challenges as written do not seem rewarding or
interesting. You will always want to use the best skill over and over. You
aren't taking part in a narrative event or succeeding through your wits or
skill, but just rolling dice.

RPG blog The Alexandrian noted problems with skill challenges in the article
[Playtesting 4th Edition – Part 6: Skill Challenges](https://thealexandrian.net/wordpress/1971/roleplaying-games/playtesting-4th-edition-part-6-skill-challenges),
describing them as part of a trend in D&D 4e where mechanics and narrative were
disassociated from each other. He described skill challenges as "caring not
about what the PCs have done, but merely how much they have done", and mandating
railroading:

> "If you follow the rules in the DMG you are supposed to (a) write a script
> for the PCs to follow; (b) tell them the script; and (c) if they try to
> deviate from the script, punish them for it with more difficult skill checks."

While he believed that complex skill checks were still promising, where they
represent social events or discrete actions which lead logically to an outcome,
he concluded that 4e's skill challenges were broken:

> This "system" is worse than useless. It’s literally just generating random
> noise and isn’t worth the paper it’s printed on.

Not everyone dislikes skill challenges. Matt Colville speaks highly of them in his 2016 video
[Skill Challenges! Running the Game #21](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GvOeqDpkBm8).
He considers them to a ways to get players to think creatively about the skills
their characters have. Matt's house rules limits all characters to one use of
each skill so that they can't just roll their best skill over and over.

### Disassociated mechanics

A general trend in D&D 4th edition is that the mechanics don't represent
anything narrative or in-world. The Alexandrian was one of the first to release
an article on this issue in 2008, titled
[Disassociated Mechanics](https://thealexandrian.net/wordpress/1545/roleplaying-games/dissociated-mechanic).

Skill challenges are one such example, but another is combat powers. For
example, marking opponents represents a game mechanic, but doesn't necessarily
represent any thing in the world. Such a rationale can be created, but it's just
a rationalization of the rule. The Alexandrian notes, for example, that if we
rationalize a certain power which +2 to allies as a battle cry which inspires
rage, it's still not mechanically blocked by effects like magical silence which
should logically affect that, so it's still disassociated.

Disassociated mechanics work fine in a video game, but D&D rules normally
represent a fictional world where common sense applies and is relevant to
understanding and interacting with the world.

## Cool features of D&D 4e
### Artifact concordance rules

In most editions of D&D, artifacts are merely overpowered items. They're hard to
integrate into a campaign except as a plot maguffin (collecting the _Rod of
Seven Parts_) or a campaign-ending event.

D&D 4th edition's _Dungeon Master's Guide_ is worth a read even for DMs of other
editions. One of its unique innovations is its rules for artifacts.

In this system, artifacts have their own will and purpose. They become more
powerful if their bearer fulfils special criteria or performs specific actions
which please it, which raises its concordance score. This lets the item start
out only moderately powerful gain power over time, which is more balanced.

The item eventually leaves its bearer, either when its goal is achieved or the
artifact considers the bearer unworthy, such as when their concordance drops too
low. This makes the artifact a challenge to carry, something which controls the
player by influencing their actions by clear game mechanics without removing
player agency. "Moving On" helps balance the artifact by having it leave once it
reaches its maximum power level. When it does leave, the player can feel like
they've achieved a success rather than that they've been robbed of an item.

This system is mechanically and thematically interesting, and gives a place
and purpose to artifacts.

### Points of Light setting

> You won't find a world map in this or any of the core D&D rulebooks. "The
> world" in which the D&D game takes place doesn't have a map&ndash;not until
> you create one.

D&D third edition's default core setting was the World of Greyhawk, a setting
whose history and lore were largely hidden in out-of-print AD&D-era rulebooks. A
setting sourcebook was produced, the ''Living Greyhawk Gazetteer'', but it was
somewhat dry and mostly useful as a reference for RPGA scenario writers and
long-time fans of the setting.

D&D 4e's _Dungeon Master's Guide_ intentionally made its world a blank slate.
There is no default or canonical world. The DM was not running "Greyhawk-lite"
or Greyhawk with the numbers filed off. Rather, the DM was entirely free to
invent their own world, unencumbered by ideas like canon or established history.
The DM has complete freedom to tailor their world on a session-to-session basis.

Importantly, the default world concept was especially well-tuned to a
traditional Dungeons & Dragons campaign. Most of the world is a dangerous
wilderness filled with monsters. Ancient ruins of past highly-magical
civilizations are common, and civilized settlements are rare. D&D 4e called this
setting concept the "Points of Light", referring to civilized settlements as
points of light in a dark and mysterious world.

RPG writer and YouTuber Matt Colville, in his Running the Game video
[Railroading, Agency, and Choice](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KqIZytzzFKU),
briefly mentions "sandbox" campaigns where players are free to explore the world
as they see fit. He draws comparison with the video game RPG _Skyrim_, where
players are free to explore a world full of interesting adventuring locations.
The main difference between _Skyrim_ and D&D is that while Skyrim defines all
possible adventures in advance, the DM of a sandbox or open-world D&D game is
free to invent largely on the fly.

Fundamentally, "Points of Light" meshes really well with how a lot of DMs
actually construct campaign worlds by inventing them as they go along. There is
no expectation that the DM will either build an entire world in advance or learn
old lore. The DM is not constrained by too many preconceived assumptions. Almost
nothing is defined until the DM defines it, and anything can be defined.

The "Points of Light" setting concept thus gives DMs the maximum amount of
flexibility and control over their own campaign world, and allows the creation
of a campaign tailored to the group.

### Reskinning and customizing monsters

While an early complaint of D&D was that the mechanical "crunch" and thematic
"fluff" often felt disconnected, this created an opportunity for DMs to re-use
the statistics for one monster to represent a completely different monster.
This was known as "reskinning", a term used by the D&D community and probably
originating in video games, but which was recognized in some later sourcebooks.

For example, the fire beetle is mechanically just a level 1 brute with a bite
attack, a close blast 3 fire spray, and fire resistance. The same stats could
represent a goblin fire mage or a steam-spewing brass construct. If you want
stats for an ankheg hatchling, just use this change the fire to acid.

A mechanic called "creature themes" was introduced in _Dungeon Master's Guide
2_. This added additional powers or traits to existing creatures based on some
shared group. For example, members of the Legion of Avernus can gain a Fire
Shield aura which harms adjacent enemies. It doesn't matter if they're humans,
tieflings, or bone devils; they can all share this trait which identifies them
as part of a group.

Small variants like this don't massively change the overall power of a creature,
but they can allow a variety of creatures in a single adventure to feel like a
coherent group, and give players the sense of learning and responding to monster
traits.

A similar mechanic, "functional templates", did a similar thing but with a
larger increase in power. You see this use of templates to create thematic
coherence in D&D 3rd edition's _Bastion of Broken Souls_ where half-dragon spawn
accompany the red dragon Ashardalon, but the advantage of creature themes is
that they don't modify challenge rating.

### At-will and daily spells

In earlier editions of D&D, wizards at level 1 started with a low number of
spells, perhaps one or two per day, and the power level of those spells was weak
compared to a fighter. The "balance" of wizards was that they became more
powerful than the fighter at higher levels. You just had to play an underpowered
character for a few levels until you got good.

In retrospect, this was a terrible way to balance classes. It happened even in
third edition, where wizard spells ran out quickly at first level and the wizard
would resort to firing a crossbow. The first-level spells were not powerful, for
their rarity.

D&D 4e gave first-level wizards the ability to cast a spell every round in
combat without resorting to thematically weak crossbows or the like. For
example, _magic missile_ now dealt 2d4 plus Int modifier damage, giving the
caster something to do when more powerful spells ran out.

D&D 5th edition follows this, but does it better. At-will 0th-level spells, now
termed "cantrips", are often equivalent to or better than the fighter's weapons.
_Fire bolt_ deals 1d10 damage. Actual 1st-level spells are now more like
artillery strikes, a limited but very powerful resource. _Magic missile_ at
level 1 deals 3d4+3 damage (average 10.5) on an auto-hit, and _burning hands_
deals 3d6 in an area (average 10.5, save half). Still, it was 4e's willingness
to break with Vancian tradition that allowed us this innovation.

## Conclusion

For D&D 5e players who never experienced 4th edition, it's enough to understand
that D&D 4e was a slow and drawn-out combat experience which required much
tracking of small status effects. It sacrificed out-of-combat experience in
favor of a more detailed combat experience which was harder to play, and D&D 5th
edition abandoned most of 4e's innovations.

D&D 5e DMs can still draw some valuable ideas from 4th edition.

The 4e _Dungeon Master's Guide_, like many earlier editions, is certainly worth
reading if you find a cheap copy on sale, for its DMing advice.

The "points of light" campaign setting philosophy encouraged DMs to start with a
blank slate and and incrementally define the world as the campaign goes along.
It's an excellent way to come up with a campaign world that suits the players.

Customizing and re-skinning monsters to create new ones is a fantastic idea. As
D&D becomes more carefully designed, it's harder for fan-made monsters to reach
the same quality and balance level as official content. Just take the statistics
of another creature of the appropriate challenge rating and change the
description into something completely different. Or, invent some power or trait
and give it to members of a group, who might serve as long-term campaign
antagonists.

D&D 4e found a way to integrate artifacts into an ongoing campaign. Before, they
were just overpowered items. D&D 4e made them practical. D&D 5e no longer
incorporates the 4e artifact concordance rules, which is a shame, as they really
gave DMs a way to use these items in a campaign that wasn't super high level.
You can achieve a similar effect by having an artifact become more powerful over
time as the player fulfils the item's goals, which can be a way to drive a
campaign.

## Footnotes

[^1]:
    [D&D 4th Edition: Designing Encounters](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oRzcVi_ymzA&5=6m42s),
    6m 52s. 19 August 2007.

[^2]:
    [4e rules will make some games much harder torun](https://www.enworld.org/threads/4e-rules-will-make-some-games-much-harder-to-run.221686/post-4112306),
    17 March 2008.

[^3]:
    [Demonweb Booster Pack](https://web.archive.org/web/20090222073813/http://wizards.com/default.asp?x=products/dndmin/217950000)
