---
title: "Babylon 5 trivia and commentary"
categories: tv babylon5
description: "A lengthy analysis of things I find interesting about Babylon 5."
---

In November 2020, a remastered high-definition version of 1990s science fiction
series Babylon 5 was released. By today's standards, Babylon 5 is dated and
corny at times, but it also has a depth of story planning and willingness to
explore religion and politics in a way you didn't see in Star Trek at the time.

You can find which services are streaming it by searching for Babylon 5 at
[Just Watch](https://www.justwatch.com/). The following guide contains spoilers,
and if you haven't seen the series yet you may wish to watch it first.

1. Table of Contents
{:toc}

## The Lurker's Guide to Babylon 5

Much of this information was gleaned from
[The Lurker's Guide to Babylon 5](https://www.lysator.liu.se/lurk/www.midwinter.com/lurk/lurker.html),
notably its [Master Episode List](https://www.lysator.liu.se/lurk/www.midwinter.com/lurk/countries/master/eplist.html),
which I recommend following as you watch each episode. It must be one of the
oldest websites still online in its original form, dating back at least as far
as June 1994, according to its What's New page. This makes it even older than
Yahoo! Search (March 1995), Internet Explorer (August 1995), and CSS (December
1996).

A remarkable feature of the Lurker's Guide is "jms speaks" section, collecting
online posts made by series creator J. Michael Straczynski, many of them made
around the time the episode aired. He often gives insight into the series'
development and corrects posters who claim to have noticed a plot hole or error.

## Similarities with Deep Space Nine

Babylon 5 has several similarities with Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, another
science fiction series set on a space station a few years in the future.

The first episode of Babylon 5 season 1 aired on January 26, 1994. At this
point, Deep Space Nine had already aired as far as season 2 episode 12, for
which JMS blames Warner Brothers delaying production on Babylon 5 until they
could justify it by seeing viewer ratings on the pilot movie, and Paramount
rushing production on DS9 to beat the Babylon 5 pilot movie to airing by around
a month.

The result is that, no doubt, a lot of viewers at the time perceived Babylon 5
as a clone of Deep Space Nine. Rather, a popular conspiracy theory suggests that
it was Deep Space Nine which copied Babylon 5, and there may be some truth to
this. JMS originally pitched Babylon 5 to Star Trek producers Paramount in 1989,
and it's not unthinkable that this influenced the decision to set DS9.

There are notable similarities between the two series. Both are set on a space
station named with a number, in orbit around a planet and near an artificially
created wormhole, located in neutral territory, which becomes tactically
important in an upcoming war. Both feature a station chief with the rank of
Commander who suffered trauma in a previous war and becomes an important figure
in an alien religion. His first officer is a hot-headed female officer. There is
an important alien leader named Dukhat/Dukat whose species fought humanity in
the war, but who were responsible for building the space station. There is a
red-haired woman named Lyta/Leeta. There is a station chief of security who
doesn't drink, and who tolerates an alien criminal organizer because at least he
can keep an eye on him. A lot of the series takes place in a large shopping
area. Both series end up with a war plotline in later series.

Many of these similarities are plausibly coincidences. Space stations appeared
in Star Trek TOS and were an understood variant of a space ship in science
fiction, which in turn lends itself to a more continuous style of plot. Stories
set on the frontier of space draw inspiration from the popular American wild
west genre, and let you tell exciting stories of conflict where our heroes can't
rely on civilization to solve their problems. War stories, likewise, make for
interesting conflict.

Personally, I'm glad that we got both series.

Star Trek wiki Memory Alpha's
[article on Babylon 5](https://memory-alpha.fandom.com/wiki/Babylon_5)
also discusses connections between Babylon 5 and Star Trek: Deep Space Nine.

## The Gathering

Babylon 5 began with a pilot movie, The Gathering, aired in February 1993,
although if you watch it now on a streaming version it'll probably be the
re-edited version in 1998, which actually made a few retcons. The original cost
US$3.5 million to produce, equivalent to around $6.9 million in 2022 money.

Babylon 5 has a significantly lower tech level than Star Trek, at least as far
as humans are concerned. Ships need artificial jump gates to travel between star
systems, human ships have rotating sections because artificial gravity doesn't
exist yet, there's no teleportation, food must be grown the old-fashioned way
without replicators, and so on. This makes it easier to tell a story rooted in
current-day limitations (e.g. trade, limited resources) without simply
overcoming those by hand-waving with magic-level tech. This was all part of an
intentional decision to tell a more realistic science fiction story. The Space
Frontier Foundation actually once gave Babylon 5 an award for "Best Vision of
the Future" for these efforts.

On the other hand, the existence of human telepaths makes it hard to tell a
series about politics, since it's easy to tell when someone lies or has an
ulterior motive. JMS had to create the Psi-Corps to constrain their power to
avoid telepaths from ruining plots or fundamentally changing the nature of human
society. They also don't explain why human telepaths exist until season 5.

A big innovation of Babylon 5 was the use of CGI, which was considerably cheaper
than the large physical models used on Star Trek at the time, although the
3D graphics look dated nowadays. Much was created on Commodore Amiga computers
using Lightwave, a considerably cost-effective platform priced more towards
hobbyists. As a result, Babylon 5 was able to use considerably more special
effects than Star Trek.

The movie is set in the year 2257, around the same year as Star Trek: The
Original Series, and in fact coterminous with Star Trek: Discovery season 2. As
a station, B5 is considerably larger than DS9: a population of around 250,000
million people, versus DS9's stated capacity of around 7,000.

Ambassador Delenn's character was originally intended to be male. The intention
was to have her played by a woman, but with her voice digitally altered to be
male. This digital voice alteration turned out not to work well, but Mira
Furlan's normal voice sounded well so they simply made the character female.

Delenn's accent is real. Actress Mira Furlan was born in Zagreb, Yugoslavia, now
part of Croatia. Londo's accent isn't real. Londo was criticized after the pilot
aired as a ridiculous comic character. Most of the other Minbari and Centauri
characters have no accents, and it's not really explained why. It's just one of
those things.

Garibaldi is named after Italian general
[Giuseppe Garibaldi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giuseppe_Garibaldi),
also the namesake of the
[Garibaldi biscuit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garibaldi_biscuit).

The notion of the "Third Age of Mankind" turns out to be just some thing
Commander Sinclair invented. I seem to recall that the first age is before
mankind discovered aliens, the second is after the discovery of aliens, and the
third age is mankind being actually self-sufficient and powerful rather than
relying on powerful aliens like the Vorlons or the Minbari or something.

When characters in Babylon 5 talk about the "nets" this may reflect JMS' own
usage of "nets" to refer to the Internet, rather than the "net" as as more
commonly used in the 90s. This perhaps reflects the early Internet where the
Internet was divided into competing commercial services (Prodigy, GENie,
Compuserve).

The name of the series may have been influenced by Pat Frank's 1959 novel
[Alas, Babylon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alas,_Babylon), described by JMS
as "one of my favorite books".

## Season 1

Each episode of the Babylon 5 series cost around $900,000 USD to produce, about
$1.7 million in 2022 money. Star Trek DS9 had something like twice the
per-episode budget.

The series replaced three actors who decided not to reprise their characters
from The Gathering. Rather than re-casting the roles of the doctor, first
officer and the telepath, their are replaced with a different doctor, first
officer and telepath, who could simply be assigned the original characters' plot
points going forward.

The official reason why Ivanova doesn't have a Russian accent is that she was
educated outside of Russia.

Some fans questioned why Sinclair, station commander, would personally fly a
fighter. JMS defended it as based on a real-world practice among higher-ranking
US Air Force officers during and after the Vietnam War, who would log flight
time to qualify for additional flight pay and to acquire the combat experience
necessary to earn promotions.

"Born to the Purple" introduce's G'Kar's aide Ko'Dath (played by Mary Woronov),
who appeared for only one episode as she had trouble with the makeup.

"The Parliament of Dreams" introduces G'Kar's aide Na'Toth, and Delenn's aide
Lennier. The aides are important to a series where several main characters are
ambassadors, because it gives the ambassadors someone they can trust to talk
about their plans to for the audience's benefit.

Lennier, of course, continued as a series regular (as well as appearing in DS9
episode
[The Siege of AR-558](https://memory-alpha.fandom.com/wiki/The_Siege_of_AR-558_(episode)),
on the condition that he didn't have to wear any annoying prosthetics). I like
his exchange with Delenn, where she says "I cannot have an aide who will not
look up"; this is later revealed to have been something Delenn in turn learned
originally from Duhkat.

Something else I like about this episode is that unlike Star Trek, which glosses
over religion, it portrays Earth's multitude of religions much as it is today.
JMS mentions that Sinclair's actor required only two tries to memorize the names
of the line of people in the handshake scene.

The episode also won an Emmy Award for makeup design. This was perhaps not fully
appreciated by actors playing Minbari, as the Minbari head bone covers the
actor's ears, muffling hearing. It turns out there's a reason why most Star Trek
aliens have ears in the same place as humans.

"Mind War" ends with the telepath Ironheart saying "I'll see you again... in a
million years." They never actually see him again. You see Earth's future in
some episodes, but we never actually meet up with Ironheart.

In "Survivors", a dock worker mortally wounded in a blast incorrectly blames
Garibaldi, and it's taken as fact since surely nobody would lie with their dying
breath. You imagine there must be some impostor going around, but there isn't.
The official word of JMS is that the worker just had a previous grudge against
Garibaldi, and lied because he didn't know he was dying. Then again, JMS didn't
write this episode.

I like "Grail", where Delenn holds very high regard for Aldous Gajic, a man
seeking the Holy Grail. It does not matter to her whether he ever finds the
Grail, or even if it is real; only that he is a True Seeker, someone whose
dedication is true; that virtue is more admirable to her and her caste than the
success of his search. JMS would later call Delenn herself a True Seeker. Gajic
is named for Mira Furlan (Delenn)'s husband,
[Goran_Gajić](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goran_Gaji%C4%87). Neither Gajic
nor his successor ever find the Grail or return to the series. I previously
mistook this episode for season 3's "A Late Delivery From Avalon", where King
Arthur comes to the station and dubs G'Kar a knight.

The character who shoots Garibaldi never gets a full name. He's known only as
"Garibaldi's aide", later "Jack" in season 2. The character was intentionally
introduced to take over Laurel Takashima's betrayal plot after she was replaced
with Ivanova, since JMS knew people online would suspect Ivanova as inheriting
Takashima's plot. A poll Garibaldi's shooting is foreshadowed when Walker, the mutai
fighter from "TKO", warns Garibaldi that he doesn't watch his back.

## Season 2

Sinclair leaves the series after season 1. The reason for actor Michael O'Hare's
departure was not revealed at the time in 1994, but following his death in 2012,
JMS revealed that he O'Hare had suffered from severe mental health difficulties,
including paranoid delusions and hallucinations. This required substantial
plot changes, especially since Sinclair had already been established as
appearing on Babylon 4. The Gathering pilot movie was retconned in 1998 to
remove a statement that Sinclair was the station's final commanding officer.

Both Jeffrey Sinclair and his replacement John Sheridan have the same initials
as writer J. (Michael) Straczynski. Sheridan, according to JMS, is descended
from civil war General 
[Philip Sheridan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philip_Sheridan), for whom the
Sheridan tank is named.

The triluminary and the system Delenn uses to metamorphosize into a part-human,
according to JMS, were technology from the planet Episilon 3. Delenn's new hair
ended up being even more time-consuming for the makeup department than the
original design. The initial plan was that she would be a male character who
metamorphoses into a female character, although they changed this while making
the pilot.

Na'Toth's actress was re-cast in season 2, and the new actress (Mary Kay Adams,
who plays the Klingon matriarch Grilka in DS9) lacked the force of personality
of the Caitlin Brown's portrayal, so the character was quietly retired. JMS had
believed that most people would not notice the difference.

Claudia Christian (Ivanova) actually broke her foot.

The Egyptian blessing "God be between you and harm, in all the empty places
where you must walk" appeared in Harlan Ellison's 1985 short story
[Paladin of the Lost Hour](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paladin_of_the_Lost_Hour);
I suspect it's not actually ancient Egyptian in origin.

The bagna cauda in "A Distant Star" real, since the actors had to eat it; but
given the number of takes of any given shot, it became cold and unpalatable.

In "Soul Mates", writer Peter David based Londo's three wives on three of the
Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse. Daggair is Pestilence, Timov is Famine, and
Mariel is Death; reflecting that, Timov's name spells "vomit" backwards. Londo,
by elimination, is War.

In "The Coming of Shadows", the actor who played Emperor Turhan was named Turhan
Bey in real life. He had previously auditioned for the season 1 role of the
technomage Elric, a role which instead went to Michael Ansara (Kang from Star
Trek). He subsequently played the Minbari Ranger instructor Sech Turval in
season 5.

The Centauri "hands of friendship" greeting is inspired by a supposed Roman
tradition to check someone for knives.

Regarding "Acts of Sacrifice", JMS was asked at the time if G'Kar's breakdown is
laughing at the absurdity of his situation, or crying. He says it's a bit of
both. This episode has the most cringeworthy scene I've ever seen in a science
fiction TV show. You know the one. Claudia Christian supposedly found the
"Ivanova Dance" quite funny, as did the rest of the crew.

In "There All the Honor Lies", where Sheridan is accused of killing a Minbari
warrior, his lawyer Guinevere Corey is played by Caitlin Brown, the original
season 1 Na'Toth. The teddybear in the episode actually originated as a gift
from the episode's writer Peter David to JMS: JS actually referred to his
initials, not John Sheridan. In revenge, JMS wrote this scene into his episode.
The other props in this episode were made by the prop department. The line "This
isn't some kind of Deep Space franchise; this place is _about_ something!" was
written by Peter David as a subtle dig at rival Deep Space Nine. The bear was
his wife's idea.

The ISN episode "And Now For a Word" contains a subliminal message during the
Psi Corps ad which says "The Psi Corps is your friend. Trust the Corps." You
need to freeze frame to see it. The FCC rules forbade subliminal messages of 2
frames per second, so to avoid this the episode shows the message for 4 frames,
or one fifteenth of a second. The frame was cut entirely from the French
broadcast. There's later an episode where the plot insolves a hidden message
transferred in a freeze frame in a video).

"In the Shadow of Z'ha'dum", is one episode where the viewer appreciates that
when a character makes a prediction, there's a very high chance of it coming
true. When Vir says he wants to see Morden's head on a pike and wave at it, we
can rest assured he will survive at least long enough for that to happen. Vir's
wave later appears in the opening sequence of a later season.

"Confessions and Lamentations" was remarkable for killing off an entire species,
rendering all the expensive prosthetics produced for that species useless. It's
a very costly episode, in that regard.

JMS has a lot to say on "Divided Loyalties", the episode where Talia is revealed
to be the telepathic sleeper agent Control, leaves the series, and her role in
the series is replaced by the original telepath Lyta Alexander from the movie,
whose actress (Patricia Tallman) had only recently given birth to a son. JMS
revals that the original plan was for Takashima to be Control, and when she
left, they moved the Psi-Corps plan plot to Lyta's replacement Talia.

In "The Long, Twilight Struggle", some online at the time doubted the realism of
a Centauri policy of executing 500 Narns for each Centauri killed. JMS
points out that the Nazis indeed did such a thing during World War II at certain
times and places.

## Season 3

Season 3 onward have fewer really goofy lines.

In "Messages from Earth", Marcus buys Ivanova bacon and eggs, which have to be
imported at great expense. He goes to all this effort but forgets that Ivanova
is Jewish.

Kosh's death in "Interludes and Examinations" surprised even the writer, which
is an unusual-sounding concept that makes perfect sense to some writers. JMS
would occasionally answer questions by asking the character in his imagination
and seeing what his imaginary conception of that character would respond. In
this instance, he also surprised himself with the plot development that Kosh
would be killed off. I've heard writers before say that they don't control their
characters, but their characters act of their own volition, even when it's a
problem for the plot.

Kosh's replacement is also named Kosh, but technically, he's actually a Vorlon
named Ulkesh, who appeared in a Babylon 5 novel. JMS posts that most people
don't even notice that the new Kosh is a different Kosh, or that the original
Kosh's ship left the station.

When the Narns kill Refa, JMS explains that the usual penalty of 500 Narns was
probably waived in order to cover up Refa's trip and thus avoid embarassing the
Centauri nobility. Refa also did't bring any bodyguards for this reason. So
characters can make impractical decisions for the series, but when it's
practical, they can also carry the idiot ball. JMS wanted to bring back the
actor William Forward as another alien, but it never happened.

It is bizarre that Sheridan travels to Z'ha'dum despite very clearly being told
in a prophecy that he would die if he did so.

JMS wrote every episode in seasons 3 and 4. There's a scene where he makes a
cameo being wheeled into medbay while clutching an awfull anachronistic 20th
century PC keyboard, apparently having collapsed from exhaustion from writing
the entire series.

## Season 4

Babylon 5 was originally intended to be five seasons long. My personal theory
here is that this may have been because Star Trek: the Original Series was three
seasons, and when Babylon 5 was greenlit in 1991, TNG was just moving into its
fifth season. Most viewers probably expected TNG would end at five seasons, two
more than TOS, not extend to seven seasons.

When Babylon 5 was in season 4 it looked like it may be cancelled, so the
show sped through the plot to wrap it up by the end of season 4. It was given a
fifth season anyway, which necessitated the invention of new plotlines after
season 4 finished all the main story.

In "The Long Night", the episode uses the season 3 ending theme. This was taken
by some as a symbolic vhoice of some point, but it was in fact completely by
accident.

There's a fantastic piece of scheming and counter-scheming in this episode with
a bizarre official explanation. The plan is that when G'Kar appears in front of
the emperor in chains, Londo has bribed the guards to replace them with weaker
chains so that G'Kar can escape them to create a distraction for the emperor's
assassination. It's revealed at a dramatic moment that the emperor had *his* men
replace the chains with stronger ones. G'Kar breaks out of the chains anyway.

My assumption here was that there are one of two possibilities: Londo's men
replaced the chains *second*, or the emperor's guards betrayed him and lied
about replacing the chains to allow the assassination to go ahead. According to
JMS, neither of these are true. G'Kar is just so strong and determined that he
can break out of the stronger chains.

Propaganda episode "The Illusion of Truth" opens with the now amusingly
incorrect prediction of a lunar colony in 2018. The term "Helsinki syndrome",
incorrectly used for
[Stockholm syndrome](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stockholm syndrome),
is a joke that previously appeared in 1998 movei _Die Hard_; in both cases it's
used to demonstrate that the incompetence of a television "expert". The names of
blacklisted people are references to actual people blacklisted in the
[Red Scare](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/McCarthyism) of the 1950s.

"Racing Mars", where Dr Franklin and Marcus go undercover by posing as a
recently married gay couple, was remarkably forward-looking in its prediction of
gay marriage, which for example would not be legal across the United States
until 2015, and is still only legal in 29 countries as of March 2022. In 1997,
when the episode aired, even acknowledging gay equality on television was seen
as a radical position.

The customer in "Moments of Transition" who tries to hire Garibaldi is Scott
Adams, creator of comic Dilbert. Dilbert was a huge deal in nerd culture in the
late 90s, especially since it was one of the newspaper funnies available for
free online.

The season finale tells a science fiction concept of religious orders preserving
science for generations in a post-apocalyptic world, as in Walter M. Miller
Jr.'s 1959 novel A Canticle for Leibowitz.

## Season 5

New stories had to be developed for season 5 when season 4 finished the
originally planned main plot. Despite Marcus sacrificing himself for Ivanova at
the end of season 4, Ivanova left the series and was replaced with a similar
female station commander.

The telepath leader Byron is played by Robin Atkin Downes, who previously played
Morann, the Minbari who made the fateful decision to approach the first Earth
ship with gun ports open. You would imagine that the ship carrying the leader of
the Minbari faction would be better defended against a single Earth vessel.
Metal Gear fans will also know him as the voice of Miller in MGSV and Peace
Walker. The original plan was for Ivanova to become involved with Byron, but
when she left the plot was moved to Lyta.

"Day of the Dead" was written by Neil Gaiman.

The finale for season 5, "Sleeping in Light", was originally filmed as the
finale for season 4, but when season 5 was greenlit, that finale episode was be
bumped back to season 5. The finale concept was planned as early as April 1992,
according to a post on the GEnie internet service.

After the series was finished, JMS planned to quit the television and return to
writing novels. There's a great deal of "jms speaks" on the Sleeping in Light
page at The Lurker's Guide to Babylon 5.

## Spinoff movies

There were a few Babylon 5 movies produced after this: In the Beginning, which
goes into the background story of how the Minbari War began; Thirdspace; The
River of Souls; A Call to Arms; and The Legend of the Rangers. In 2007, they
released Babylon 5: The Lost Tales, a few independent stories which had much
better CGI, being released many years after the original. They're all generally
worth watching.

Other Babylon 5 works including novel are mentioned at the Wikipedia page
[Babylon 5 (franchise)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Babylon_5_(franchise)).

## Crusade

As I write this, Just Watch does not list the Babylon 5 spinoff Crusade as
available on any streaming service, although it is on digital sale in some
countries.

The series wasn't great, and it was cancelled after 13 episodes had been
produced. The resulting attempt to produce some kind of finished coherent series
out of this led to some absolutely terrible CGI even for the late 90s, and
numerous continuity errors.

In one episode, they orbit an alien planet that there was no time or money to
render, so it's literally just a model of Earth. Another time there's a truly
terrible attempt to render the technomage character entirely in CGI (spaceships
could be rendered in the 90s, but realistic humans were beyond the their
capability, and yet this did not stop them from trying). Because of the airing
order, they occasionally discover or develop technology one episode after the
one where they use it. The uniforms change for some reason halfway through the
series, making it difficult to re-order the episodes for better pacing.

## Further reading

* [Babylon 5](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Babylon_5) at Wikipedia
