---
title: "Adapting D&D 5e without skill proficiencies"
category: rpg
tags: rules
description: "Adaptions necessary to use the D&D 5e Ability Check Proficiency variant rule."
license: CC BY
published: false
---

Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition has a little-used variant rule which eliminates
skill proficiencies. Early editions of D&D didn't have a full skill system, and
there's a good argument presented in _A Quick Primer for Old School Gaming_ that
it's unnecessary, and that skills shift the game's focus from player ingenuity
and world interaction to character build.

This raises a question: When we play D&D 5th edition without skill
proficiencies, what side-effects need to be accounted for?

1. Table of Contents
{:toc}

## Overview of the rule

The D&D 5th edition _Dungeon Master's Guide_ (2014), Chapter 9: Dungeon Master's
Workshop, has a selection of Skill Variants. Among them is the Ability Check
Proficiency rule, where player characters simply gain proficiency in all checks
using a given ability score, rather than picking skills.

Each character chooses proficiency in two ability scores: one from their class,
picked from a list; and one from their background, depending on what makes
sense. You are proficient in all ability checks with those ability scores.

The rules seem like they may have been designed with this variant in mind,
perhaps to appeal to players of the Old-School Renaissance. Throughout the
5e core rulebooks, skill checks are referred to as ability checks, and the
ability score is given first.

## The rule in practice

The DM no longer calls for a Perception check, but a Wisdom check. New players
need not be confused because they don't have that skill or don't know which
ability score that skill uses. The only real confusion is the traditional
difference between Intelligence and Wisdom, and the DM may allow some
flexibility, e.g. allowing a player to use either Int or Wis to search a room,
if they can justify it by the description of their actions.

In theory, it's simpler for new players, since there are only six ability scores
to roll, and for each you have an ability check and a saving throw value. There
is no debate over whether Arcana or History applies to this specific thing;
either you have Intelligence proficiency or you don't.

However, skill names can often inspire players to think of actions. Knowing that
you have Arcana might suggest to the player that they can roll it for a clue,
whereas having Intelligence won't necessarily inspire that idea.

The bigger drawback is that increasingly, D&D is reliant on tools and resources
which assume the standard rules. The newbie-friendly ready-made character sheets
use skills. D&D Beyond's character uses skills. Even the actual printable
character sheets have an entry for skills. In that sense, the use of the simpler
proficiency system is not all that beneficial to newbie players.

## Breakdown by ability score

Under standard 5e rules, there are skill proficiencies for five of the six
ability scores; there are no Constitution proficiencies in 5e. Ability Check
Proficiency essentially merges each ability score into one proficiency, so that
if you have one, you have the others. Characters usually tend to take skills
that match the ability scores necessary for their combat abilities, but
simplification limits complexity, like rogues mixing Dex and Int skills.

Strength
: Unmodified. There is only one Strength skill, Athletics, so having Strength
proficiency instead is unaffected.

Dexterity
: Acrobatics, Sleight of Hand, and Stealth are the three skills in this ability
score. I have never known anyone to take Sleight of Hand who wasn't a Rogue, and
never known a Rogue who didn't take Sleight of Hand. High Dexterity characters
also tend to wear less armor, and rogues practically have to take Stealth for
Sneak Attack. Rarely will you see these skills taken individually in separate
archetypes. This does mean that all rogues are going to be Dexterity focused,
rather than picking Stealth and three other skills (e.g. Deception,
Investigation, Perception and Stealth).

Intelligence
: Arcana, History, Investigation, Nature, Religion. You most commonly see the
Intelligence skills spread throughout the party, with the cleric taking
Religion, the wizard Arcana, etc. Ability Check Proficiency (lets abbreviate it
to ACP) means a single party member has all the knowledge skills. Often that's a
wizard, who now becomes knowledegable about religion, but conversely, it may
awkwardly lead the druid to lose Nature. An investigator type PC automatically
becomes a Sherlock Holmes who is knowledgeable in a wide variety of fields.

Wisdom
: Animal Handling, Insight, Medicine, Perception, Survival. The Druid or Ranger
suits all of these. The cleric, assuming Wisdom, now becomes
uncharacteristically skilled with wilderness survivalism and calming anxious
horses, and becomes skilled at reading people (Insight); conversely, a rogue who
is skilled at reading people is unlikely since they are going to take Dexterity.
It makes more sense for the cleric to take Intelligence.

Charisma
: Deception, Intimidation, Performance, Persuasion. Anyone who is good at lying
is also good at diplomacy and vice versa. this is perhaps the most realistic,
although it omits the high-strength character skilled in intimidation. It does
mean the party bard becomes good at intimidating.

## Effect on background

Background becomes even more important under this selection. At time of writing
there is talk in the upcoming rules revision (One D&D, or Revised 5th) of making
background more important, too.

Under normal rules, background gives two skill proficiencies, and picking one
that you already have lets you pick any proficiency. The normal rules let you
use this to play a traditional archetype (say, acolyte cleric) and add any skill
you want (a cleric with stealth, perhaps), which adds versatility. Other than
that, background is a lot about developing character individuality.

Under the variant, we hit our first snag: how do we handle, say, a sage wizard
who who gains the same ability score proficiency from both ability score and
class? Do you pick a second freely, so that our sage wizard can have
Intelligence and Charisma if they wish? Probably. You could already do something
similar under the standard rules.

Aside from this situation, selecting background becomes more important becausae
it's the only way to get a variety of skills. Take the traditional rogue who
wants both Stealth and Perception; they naturally take Dexterity from their
class, and are forced to take a background which would logically give Wisdom.
You cannot, say, play an entertainer rogue with Dex and Wis. You lose the Ã  la
carte flexibility of the standard system, which would have let you play an
entertainer rogue with Perception.

We might as readily allow the player to pick any two ability scores, of which
one must fit their class. Even then, it is less flexible than the standard
method.

## Expertise

Expertise is specifically accounted for in the variant rules. Normally,
Expertise gives you double proficiency bonus in any two skills. In the variant,
the double proficiency bonus applies to the entire ability score.

The rest of this article deals with specific instances where skills are called
for in the _Player's Handbook_. Every situation is trivial to handle, either by
calling it a straight situational ability check or by calling it Expertise; you
can skip to [conclusions](#conclusions) without missing much.

## Race

Dwarves have stonecunning, granting History proficiency and Expertise related to
stonework. Under "ACP", you have to assume this applies to Intelligence checks
related to stonework. It's effectively the same thing.

Drow have sunlight sensitivity, disadvantage to Perception checks in sunlight.
In the variant you have to assume this applies to Wisdom checks in sunlight.

The forest gnome has effective proficiency and expertise in History checks
related to magic items or technology. Like the dwarf's stonecunning, you have to
assume this applies to Intelligence checks related to magic items.

## Class

Several class abilities apply to certain skills. The solution in most of these
cases is to make it an ability score check in that circumstance. For example,
the ranger has advantage on Wisdom (Survival) to track enemies; with the variant
in play, that just becomes advantage to Wisdom checks to track enemies.

A list of class abilities that are so affected:

Barbarian
: Path of the Totem Warrior: Aspect of the Beast (Eagle)

Cleric
: Trickery domain: Blessing of the Trickster

Druid
: Druidic (chance for non-druids to spot Druidic writing)

Ranger
: Favored enemy (track enemies); Hide in Plain Sight

Rogue
: Thief: Fast Hands, Supreme Sneak; Assassin: Impostor; Arcane Trickster: _Mage
Hand_ Legerdemain

Sorcerer
: Wild Magic: Wild Magic Surge (2% chance)

The cleric Knowledge domain grants two Intelligence skill proficiencies at level
1, and effectively Expertise with those. The solution may be for this to grant
Intelligence proficiency. This would be more powerful, but it's in keeping with
the variant rule for Expertise, which extends two skills to cover an entire
ability score. The Knowledge cleric effectively starts with proficiency in three
ability scores.

The rogue remarkably gains Expertise twice at different levels. The result will
be that they have Expertise in both their ability proficiencies. This is
probably most reasonable for the rogue, who is traditionally the party's skill
guy. It does mean that something like a Dex/Int rogue ends up being more
knowledgable about lore than the party wizard.

## Equipment

Certain armor grants disadvantage on Dexterity (Stealth); this naturally just
becomes Dexterity checks to sneak or hide.

## Feats

The Actor feat gives advantage to Charisma (Deception) and Charisma
(Performance) checks to diguise as another person... this just becomes a
Charisma check. Likewise with Deception vs Insight to mimic speech. Nearly all
ACP adaptions are just like this. 

Dungeon Delver gives advantage on checks to notice secret doors. Interestingly,
it suggests that both Wisdom (Perception) and Intelligence (Investigation) can
be used to spot secret doors.

Skulker and the Armor feats, likewise.

## Spells

Various spells use ability checks. Most commonly, Intelligence (Investigation)
is used to detect illusions.

## Conclusions

In nearly every situation where a game rule modifies an ability check using a
certain skill, it is trivial to call this an ability check for a given
situation; e.g. "advantage on Wisdom (Perception)" becomes "advantage on Wisdom
checks to perceive something". The only major exception is Expertise, which is
covered, and becomes a more poweful ability.

The effect of the skill system is to codify categories of skill use. Multiple
game mechanics can converge on that point. You don't have to measure the edge
cases of, say, a bonus to Wisdom checks to _hide_, and an item granting
advantage to Wisdom checks to _remain hidden_; "Stealth" covers all of these.

The disadvantage of the Ability Check Proficiency variant is that it constrains
certain avenues of character optimization. The advantage is to simplify the game
for new players, but this complicates things because all the other rules and
resources use standard rules. It also creates some awkward side-effects, like
making it difficult for some classes to learn traditional skills.

The variant also does not fully address the problem with skills mentioned in
_A Quick Primer for Old School Gaming_, namely that they place character ability
above player skill. D&D loses something, it is argued, when success is locked
behind character build rather than the player's ingenuity and their interactions
with the fictional game world.

Perhaps the true solution to skill over-use is for the DM to allow both skill
rolls, in the standard manner, and success purely through player skill, such as
working out the correct spot to search in a room, or coming up with a good lie
to fool the guard.

The _Dungeon Master's Guide_ also gives suggestions to grant proficiency based
on character background or backstory. This, to me, suggests a system where
characters are encouraged to develop backstory over time, within the constraint
that they can't contradict themselves. Suppose the fighter claims proficiency in
handling horses because he was part of a cavalry unit during the war; he may do
so, but this locks that element in as part of his backstory, so he cannot claim
to have spent the same war learning mountain claiming, for example. I am still
uncertain whether such background training is best represented using
proficiency, expertise, or advantage, but that is another question entirely.

## Further reading

- [A Quick Primer for Old School Gaming](https://www.lulu.com/shop/matthew-finch/quick-primer-for-old-school-gaming/ebook/product-3159558.html) (2008)
