---
title: "You're playing Monopoly wrong"
category: games
tags: monopoly
description: "Why players ignore a little-known official Monopoly rule, and the drawbacks of doing so."
license: CC BY
published: true
---

In 2005, online gaming fanzine _Critical Miss_ posted an article titled
[The Campaign for Real Monopoly](https://web.archive.org/web/20230811063449/http://www.criticalmiss.com/Issue10/CampaignRealMonopoly1.html).
This single post enlightened the world to a hidden truth: most of us have been
playing the board game Monopoly wrong our entire lives, and the game is worse
for it.

## The Campaign For Real Monopoly

The concept of an "online fanzine" is unfamiliar to most Internet users
nowadays, but in truth I can't think of one other than _Critical Miss: The
Magazine for Dysfunctional Roleplayers_. It released its first issue in Autumn
1998, in a time before Wordpress or even LiveJournal, when the dominant method
of publishing online was to learn HTML and code your own website by hand. There
was no standardized style of structure to a website, leading to a great variety
in early non-commercial websites.

_Critical Miss_ patterned itself after amateur print fanzines, collecting its
articles into a single issue before releasing it. This would go out of style
once blogging became the norm, where sites would post new articles on a regular
basis to attract regular viewers.

By its final issue in September 2011, _Critical Miss_ would count its biggest
impact on society as a single 2005 article titled
[The Campaign For Real Monopoly](https://web.archive.org/web/20230811063449/http://www.criticalmiss.com/Issue10/CampaignRealMonopoly1.html).
This was unexpectedly re-discovered in 2011, when it was linked on political
analyst Ezra Klein's blog, and again in 2013, where it was linked on The Penny
Arcade Report on May 16. Penny Arcade was a huge part of Internet culture back
then, and merely being linked from their comic could overload a site into
inaccessibility, a phenomenon sufficiently well known to have a nickname:
"wanged". Perhaps by 2013 server bandwidth had improved enough to mostly
alleviate this problem, but from here it appears to have made its way into
mainstream news.

[As the article's original author describes](https://web.archive.org/web/20210618184130/https://jonnynexus.com/tag/real-monopoly/),
it soon spread throughout multiple major news sites, all copying each other,
including mistakes. Journalists, paid to generate stories rather than
fact-check, gladly repeated the source's name as _Near Miss_ rather than
_Critical Miss_, and believed that _The Campaign For Real Monopoly_ was an
actual ongoing campaign. Even the reputable BBC believed it.

## The rule everyone forgets

The crux of the _Critical Miss_ article is this: In Monopoly, when you land on
an available property and do not purchase it, the Banker immediately places it
up for auction and it is sold to the highest bidder. This is not a house rule,
but one of the standard.

How come nobody seems to know this? Most likely, it's because nobody reads the
rules when they first sit down to play, but learns the game by playing it. If
professional journalists can't Google to get the name of a website correct
before reporting on it, what hope do we have that casual family board game
players will do their own research?

Even when the auction rule is pointed out, other players frequently ignore it
because it's not tradition. It's not culture. Players agree amongst themselves
how the game is played.

## How bad is it?

It may not be an exaggeration to say that ignoring the auction rule ruins
Monopoly.

The result of ignoring the rule is that players can only purchase new properties
at full price. As a result, they run out of money sooner. They own fewer
properties, and so there are fewer opportunities for money to change hands,
which prolongs the game without making it any more interesting. Players land on
properties they cannot buy until they have passed "Go" a few times to build
capital. It takes longer for anything interesting to happen.

Luck becomes a greater factor, making the game feel less fair. Whoever goes
first has a huge advantage, because they can buy properties first. Even then,
they can't afford to place houses on their properties, which slows the rate of
entropy, keeping the game going longer than many players' patience. It becomes
stodgy.

Without the auction rule, you can only purchase properties on your own turn,
which gives huge advantage to whoever lands on it first. It's harder to collect
a set, which in turn delays construction of houses, which in turn slows the rate
at which players are knocked out of the game. More turns will see you land on
properties you can't afford, or which are underdeveloped by the owner.

There's less need for players to pay attention on other people's turn, except to
watch for anyone landing on their properties, so the game becomes less engaging
as everyone is just waiting for their own turn, which occupies only a fraction
of the play time (e.g. a quarter, if there are four players).

## Everyone's a game designer

It can be argued that anyone who ever house-ruled, modified, or interpreted a
game rule is a game designer, in a sense. That doesn't mean they're _good_ game
designers.

When I first read D&D 5th edition, what impressed me most was the overhaul to
low-level wizard spellcasting. In 3rd edition, a first-level wizard had perhaps
two first-level spells per day, and the most useful of those (i.e. _sleep_,
_color spray_) were awkwardly constructed so that they could be powerful, but
only at low level. The game pretended that wizards were the ultimate
damage-dealers, but on most rounds of combat, you just shot with your crossbow
instead. Fifth edition turned first-level wizards into real arcane artillery,
and I consider this good design.

Once, I heard of a D&D 5th edition group who previously played 3rd edition, and
were amazed to discover that the wizard could cast _fire bolt_ as a cantrip
at-will, dealing 1d10 damage. This was a huge boost over 3e, so the group agreed
that it would clearly be more balanced to nerf it to 1d6. The wizard's spell now
dealt less damage than a crossbow (1d8), rendering it pointless.

And these are D&D players, a category of people who are typically above-average
at house-ruling and adjudicating. Monopoly is a game of casual players.

## Bad house rules

Monopoly players are often aware that the game plays poorly, and try to solve it
by implementing house rules. Unfortunately, these often make the game worse.

One common house rule forbids players from purchasing any property on their
first go around the board. This may have been implemented to prevent the player
who goes first from buying up properties sooner. In practice, it just delays the
game even longer. The game board also displays no means to track how many loops
a player has made, so it's easy for a player to forget and purchase property on
their first go-around by accident.

There's an unrelated but interesting similar story about how mana points (MP)
appeared in RPGs. Dungeons & Dragons originally had a spell memorization system,
by which author Gary Gygax meant that each spell could be memorized once and
cast once. Players misinterpreted that a memorized spell could be cast an
unlimited number of times, which of course was too powerful. As a fix, some
players developed the MP system to put a numeric limit on spell use. Even when
Gygax clarified the intent of the rule, many players simply ignored this because
they didn't want to nerf their characters or change how they played.

## More house rules

On December 22, 2004, the Wikipedia entry "Official rules of Monopoly" was spun
off from its original article, which was moved to Wikibooks on August 3, 2005.
Since then, the edit history on that article has been interesting, to say the
least.

Despite the rules being well-defined in a
[readily available PDF](https://www.hasbro.com/common/instruct/monins.pdf)
from Hasbro's website, edits were made to the wiki which wildly diverged from
this document. Users entered house rules as if they were standard rules, as do
"clarifications" that are not supported by any official set of rules. In
particular, a series of edits in 2015 reverted a number of such accumulated
rules.

One such false rule forbids buying more than one house per turn. Another forbids
buying houses on your first go around the board. You can't buy houses while in
jail; by another, you can't collect rent while in jail. You can't buy houses
unless you're currently on the property. You can't buy a property if another
player owns a property of that color. Auctions must start at half of the usual
price, but only the person who landed can bid, guaranteeing a half-price buy.

The wiki editors' rules on trading and mortgaging properties are especially lax.
When you buy properties from other players, you get the houses on it too (the
normal rule requires them to be demolished first). You can sell houses back to
the bank for the mortgage value, rather than half the purchase price of the
houses. Any player can force the sale of a mortgaged property. If you land on an
owned property, you can buy it at the price of the property plus the rent, even
if the owner doesn't want to sell. You don't have to pay rent if you roll
doubles; alternatively, you can't buy property if you roll doubles.

The bank, by one rule, can loan a player $500 at any time. This keeps players in
the game long after it should have ended. You have to pay it back in full before
you reach Go, or you're bankrupt. Another false rule has you pay $500 when
landing on jail for "Just Visiting", which would bankrupt players quickly. As if
to balance that out, landing directly on Go lets you collect $400 instead of the
usual $200.  Rolling double ones gives you one of each bill in the bank, worth
$686. A lot of these rules seem to be about injecting money into the game which
wouldn't be necessary if you could buy properties more cheaply at auction.

And, of course, there's the house rule that all money collected in taxes, fines,
and so on, goes into a pot which is won by whoever lands on Free Parking; the
pot is then initialized to $500. Now the game is even more random, and the bank
can run out of cash more quickly. (The bank can always write IOUs, but it's an
inconvenience.)

Some rules are so confusingly written that I can't even tell what they're trying
to say:

> If you rent something from someone you now get the place and the money.
> Recieving what has not got you pay worth.

The user-editable Wikibooks page thus stands as an example of people using
changed rules and assuming that these are just how the game is played, or
communicating such to everyone else.

## Solution

Frankly, the optimum solution is not play Monopoly. As a family game, it too
often repeats an unfair scene where a parent guides a distraught young player
through the process of dismantling all their assets to pay a debt, culminating
in their ejection from the game. The rest of the players are then forced to go
around the board even though it's clear who's winning, so the game usually ends
by mutual agreement at this point.

A much better family game with a similar theme is
[Machi Koro](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machi_Koro).
There is no board to go around. You roll dice, and the numbers activate
different buildings, which give you money that you can use to buy more
buildings. Some buildings can earn on other players' rolls too. It's complex
enough to benefit from player skill, but simple enough for a family game. You're
competing, but not actively taking money each other, so it's more friendly and
less hurt feelings.

There's also [Splendor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Splendor_(game)),
a game about investing in gem mining industry; and
[7 Wonders](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/7_Wonders_(board_game)),
about building a civilization. Both are simple to play, making them suitable for
all ages, but have skill elements that allow the game to be enjoyed even by
grown-up players.

There's no need to subject your family to the awful game that is Monopoly. It is
a terrible game invented to demonstrate how monopolies on land ownership benefit
the land owner but can create unpleasant circumstances for tenants. Judging by
the high chance that the game regularly ends in tears, it is very successful at
this task, but not at being a fun game.
